[Anna Rose] (0:06 - 0:18)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, a podcast where we explore the latest in blockchain technology and the decentralised web. The show is hosted by me, Anna, and me, Fredrik.

[Frederik] (0:24 - 0:37)
In this episode, we sit down with Alex and Illia from Near Protocol to talk about some of their work, their whiteboard sessions, which have become pretty popular, and some of the challenges in UX for blockchain.

[Anna Rose] (0:44 - 1:41)
Before we start, we want to say thank you to this week's sponsor, Trail of Bits. Trail of Bits recently released their smart contract audit executive summary. In this, they aggregated the work of 23 smart contract audits, and they found that 78% of high-impact, easily exploitable findings are discoverable with automated analysis tools, 50% of all findings will never be found with automated tools, and most surprisingly, unit testing has no impact on security.

For more, have a look at their latest blog post at blog.trailofbits.com. We'll also share the link in the show notes. So thank you again, Trail of Bits, for supporting this podcast.

And now, here's our interview with Near Protocol. So today we're sitting down with Alex and Illia from Near Protocol, and we're going to be finding out about their work on sharding, randomness, and usability. Welcome to the show, guys.

[Alexander Skidanov] (1:41 - 1:42)
Thanks for having us.

[Anna Rose] (1:42 - 1:43)
And as always, we have Frederick.

[Alexander Skidanov] (1:44 - 1:44)
Hello.

[Anna Rose] (1:44 - 1:49)
Maybe tell me a little bit about where you guys started out. What were you working on before you started building Near Protocol?

[Alexander Skidanov] (1:50 - 3:10)
Cool. Okay, so this is Alex. My background starts in college, where I was participating in ACMICPC, which is a competitive programming competition where it's a world championship where people solve sort of very non-practical problems, whomever can solve the most of them in a short period of time.

But that competition correlates very heavily with people being smart, and so that's where I met many people with whom we work today. And also, ACMICPC is a great way for people to escape provincial cities in Russia where I was born. And so after ACMICPC, I got an offer from Microsoft.

And so I worked a little bit at Microsoft for a year and a half. I quickly left Microsoft. It's a very slow-paced environment, and I moved to Silicon Valley.

And most of my work experience happened at a company called MemSQL, which is a sharded database. I started there. I was the first engineer, so I joined when there was only three people in the Pemiranian.

When I left, it was a 150-people company with tens of millions of ARR. And then after MemSQL, I met Illia. Both of us were doing machine learning back then.

I briefly worked for OpenAI. Illia will tell what he was doing. Machine learning didn't fly.

And then we will talk how we got into blockchain space and why near.

[Anna Rose] (3:11 - 3:12)
What about you, Illia? What's your background?

[Illia Polosukhin] (3:13 - 6:49)
Yeah. So for about 10 years, I've actually been doing machine learning. I started when I was in the first year of college.

I'm also from a provincial city in Ukraine, so I needed to escape somehow. So I started working for a U.S. company from there. First, it was decision trees, and then kind of slowly moved to more sophisticated methods.

I moved to the U.S. and realised that the company I worked for wasn't going anywhere from the perspective of adopting neural networks. So I looked around and saw that Google Research is pretty much the place where all of the deep learning researchers are. So I just went directly there.

And shortly after I joined, I started leading a team working on natural language. So we mostly work on question answering, but also a lot of kind of adjacent topics. So some of the questions on Google.com are answered by our models. And then at Google, there was kind of development of deep learning kind of frameworks. And then as time went, they realised they needed something new. So that's when TensorFlow started.

And I wasn't there in the beginning, but I kind of jumped on it pretty early and then realised it's not very usable for a regular developer. So I built what kind of became a framework for regular developers and data scientists to use TensorFlow. When I was leaving Google, about 600 teams inside Google used it.

And then outside, I don't know, but a lot of people use TensorFlow through the interfaces. So for a while, I was like number three, number four by commits on GitHub, and then kind of slowly slided as I started doing startups. So did you do some startups afterwards?

So yeah, so pretty much I left to join Alex as we were kind of like, both of us wanted to do startups. Google, even though it is faster than Microsoft, but still relatively slow place. And I wanted to do something fast paced.

I wanted to actually make an impact. We joined and kind of are like I also participate in ICBC, not as successfully as Alex was like on national level. You advanced to the finals, right?

You just messed up your visa. That was yeah. And then we pretty much got together through our mutual friend in competitive programming, and then started exploring what are the ideas we can work on.

We have iterated through a few, and then went through IC. Well, Alex went through IC, I joined right when they got into it. We kind of end up realising this idea we had was not...

Multiple ideas we've had. Multiple ideas we had were not going. We did.

We did work on for a year on this idea of that software is becoming more and more mechanical. And there's a lot of parts of it can be automated. And like one of the last things I worked on at Google was machine translation.

So we can actually translate natural language to other natural language. Well, can we try natural language to programmes? Yeah.

And then, but then we realised that like doing research in a startup is not like it's always going to lead to the results at the time frame you have allocated for you as a startup. You die. You run out of money.

And then the other reason was it was extremely hard to hire anybody. Like people who were in machine learning, who were really good, who we needed to hire have extremely high salaries at Google, Microsoft.

[Alexander Skidanov] (6:49 - 6:51)
Just Google. Google vacuum cleans them.

[Illia Polosukhin] (6:52 - 7:39)
Yeah. Yeah. Pretty much we lost all of our candidates to Google and a few to other places.

Yeah. So that's where it kind of, where you started looking at blockchain partially because some of the friends of ours switched from AI to blockchain. Partially it was like, we thought, Hey, you know, smart contracts need some of the formal notification tooling.

We build a lot of kind of machinery around that, around like search inside the programme space. But as we were looking at it, we realised it's pretty underdeveloped space in general, like we were looking at it August or like July last year. At that point, there was no sharded blockchains whatsoever, not launched, but not even like in active development.

Well, that was Zilliqa.

[Alexander Skidanov] (7:40 - 7:43)
So yes, there was no sharded blockchains whatsoever being developed.

[Illia Polosukhin] (7:45 - 8:03)
And at the same time, nobody actually focused on how to get this network usable, right? Nobody actually like, Hey, how do we get this in front of like regular developer who doesn't need to learn about consensus, doesn't need to spend like months and months learning, but instead just kind of can sit down and write an app in a day, right?

[Alexander Skidanov] (8:04 - 8:17)
That's a huge shortcut. It took us a while to realise that nobody needs a fast blockchain today. Like you go to people, you talk to application developers, like it could be very fast and like, yeah, but we have no customers.

We don't need a fast blockchain anyway yet.

[Frederik] (8:17 - 8:43)
So coming from that more traditional tech company and startup space, you know, I've heard that same story, the exact same story that you just told from multiple other people, many of whom are like one of the teams working on ETH2 where they're kind of going, well, I see all these problems, you know, what's the most impactful way that I can contribute? I'm going to, you know, work on this next generation blockchain in ETH2. What made you actually write your own thing?

[Alexander Skidanov] (8:44 - 10:07)
When we started, we quickly realised that what we, especially what we were building at the beginning was very similar to ETH 2.0. And so we were talking to, we talked a little to Vitalik, we talked more to other people from the Ethereum ecosystem. There's a problem which is to build such a blockchain, you need very good talent, right? If you go to our team page, you will see we have people who have decades of experience, people who won ICPC championships.

And that talent is expensive. And Ethereum is super cheap in the sense that they pay very little money. And their general approach, right, they have very consolidated research, and the development has to completely follow research.

So that's also a problem because people who are at the level, at the highest level, you know, in the engineering career, they will not be doing that. They want to be, they want to have freedom. They actually want to have this, to have a saying.

And so we were discussing with Ethereum how we can work together. And I don't think it is possible, it wasn't possible at that stage. So we're building, so yeah, the answer is fundraise, reasonable money for a separate project, build a separate project.

And then at the end of the day, Justin Drake told us a very smart thing, which is, at the end of the day, it's not Vitalik, you know, or Justin or anyone else who decides what Ethereum 2.0 is. So nothing stops us from launching Near and saying this is Ethereum 2.0. We even have a blog post title, Ethereum 2.0 is Near.

[Anna Rose] (10:10 - 10:12)
Oh, you're treading in some dangerous territory there.

[Alexander Skidanov] (10:12 - 10:32)
From, from perspective of, of like research and pushing the innovation, people should not care if it's Ethereum or Near. They should care about technology, which is the best. You know, it's not the fight of, of brands.

It's whomever can push the boundary further. If it's Ethereum, that's great. That's good for the society.

If it's us, it's also great. It's also good for the society.

[Anna Rose] (10:33 - 10:50)
I think one of the initial impressions that I got, and I think a lot of people get when they meet you, is your ambition. You guys are ballsy. You are moving quickly, and you seem to feel very confident about that.

What gives you that?

[Alexander Skidanov] (10:50 - 11:29)
But that's because you can see the momentum of other projects. You can compare, right? You can see, and they, I think other people are a little slow.

Not, not all of them. There are some projects which I'm, which are very strong, right? Naturally Polkadot is one of them.

Polkadot is moving fast, especially now that Alistair is, you know, making all the breakthroughs. Telegram Open Network, nobody knows what's happening, but it seems like they're making progress. So there it's unclear, but most of the projects, they're moving pretty slowly.

So we feel pretty confident that we can, if not beat all of them to shipping, we can, we will not be later than them significantly.

[Illia Polosukhin] (11:30 - 11:48)
But I think one of the reasons kind of gave us confidence is that we started pretty late, right? But we caught up really quickly. And I mean, we have this whiteboard series, which actually powered, in a way, some of our catching up and accelerated us.

[Anna Rose] (11:49 - 12:20)
Yeah, I actually, that was one of the things that I wanted to talk to you guys about. At the Zero Knowledge Summit 3, you actually recorded one of the whiteboard sessions. I think you were, you're actually recording with Alistair that time.

But I did know about whiteboard sessions before that. And it was a way, I guess, that you guys kind of connected with these other teams. But it was also a way where you would spend, you know, I don't know how long you do these things for an hour, two hours, digging in, like picking the minds of some of the best researchers in the space.

How did you get them to do that?

[Alexander Skidanov] (12:22 - 12:40)
We never had anyone say no. Yeah, I mean, DFINITY said no, because they're super, you know, it's a world garden. They don't want anyone to know what they're building.

Ava said no, but nobody else ever said no. Everybody wants to be, people want to have exposure. And that's an extra way to get exposure to the technical audience.

Technical audience loves whiteboard series.

[Illia Polosukhin] (12:41 - 13:08)
And for their community, that's pretty much the only way for them to learn how the protocol works, right? Because like nobody's going to read the white paper into the detail. And usually white paper doesn't even have this detail anyway.

And then you can like get in front of everybody in your community. So actually video where you explain the things and somebody actually can ask you very intelligent and like deep questions, that's the best way for them to spread their knowledge.

[Alexander Skidanov] (13:09 - 13:17)
We also have this saying, which is a blockchain protocol without whiteboard session in 2019 is like a blockchain protocol without white paper in 2016.

[Frederik] (13:18 - 13:37)
Did you intentionally set out to like that that is the goal, like bring in the best minds and learn from them and like try to figure out what they're doing so that you can like learn from that and take the best of all worlds? Or was it accidental along the way?

[Alexander Skidanov] (13:37 - 14:33)
So it wasn't accidental. Sort of the idea to do exactly that. It is super convenient that Solana is across the court, is across like the next to us.

It's next building. And Zaki is frequently in San Francisco. So we immediately had the first two episodes scheduled.

And from there, we saw that it's a good idea. And so learning is one of the biggest reasons why we do that, because we learn a lot. The second is, it's also a great way to educate others.

Because for many protocols, Polkadot was no exception in this sense. There's very little available on the web that would explain tech details, right? So people know a lot about Polkadot, that it's, you know, parachains, what it provides you, but very little how it works internally.

And obviously, there's a third reason, which is it's also great marketing for NEAR. Because people say, well, those two guys, they seem to be smart, especially the skinnier guy. So why not?

[Anna Rose] (14:34 - 15:09)
No one, none of our listeners know who you're talking about, but they're going to assume it's you. Yeah, that's really, so that's interesting. And I think it's a very creative way to get sort of those three goals met, marketing yourselves, learning, and teaching others.

So as you did these whiteboard sessions, like you were learning, but do you feel like, I mean, is NEAR Protocol then sort of an amalgamation of a lot of these kind of insights that you've learned through these whiteboard sessions?

[Alexander Skidanov] (15:09 - 15:43)
I know two things that we definitely took from whiteboard sessions, but I think others definitely influenced us to think in some direction, right? But we definitely took ideas from Polkadot and from Quarkchain. We had our solutions, but they were inferior.

But yeah, certainly just the mindset, as you talk to people, you have those ideas, you might not use them directly, but your mind thinks now in a different way, you know, like you get, it's very good to know how every single project in the space works. And yeah, that definitely helps to design yours and at least not to...

[Illia Polosukhin] (15:43 - 16:27)
Not to fall into the same pitfalls that they fell. As we were talking, like for some projects, you can clearly see where they end up with because of some decisions early on. And that's actually one of the things we make sure that we don't get kind of into the hole because of something we decided to do before.

Like we actually changed fully our protocol in April. Yeah. And that is like, I'm pretty sure impossible for every other blockchain.

So far we talked because they kind of very focused on what they said they will build. And for us, it's like we want to achieve the goal of actually like scalable, usable blockchain and not like build very specific consensus or sharding or whatever.

[Alexander Skidanov] (16:27 - 16:27)
Yeah.

[Illia Polosukhin] (16:28 - 16:28)
Yeah.

[Alexander Skidanov] (16:28 - 16:55)
Blockchain has this concept of differentiation where every protocol needs to have this like, you know, unique thingy. And that's what identifies it. Like national signatures for DFINITY or this, you know, hidden validators for Algorand.

And they cannot walk away from that feature because that will remove their identity. And we sort of never developed that unique feature. And so we can do whatever.

We don't have this pressure from the society. Interesting. Yeah.

Yeah.

[Frederik] (16:55 - 17:46)
I think you have, I mean, your attitude in general is very anti-maximalist, which I think is really good. And like, like you said, like the best technology should be the one that wins. I don't necessarily believe that's how the world works, unfortunately.

But if we're lucky, it does. And the best technology wins. And like, regardless of who has tokens and what, or who gains economically from that, as long as it forwards society, that's good.

And I think to actually act on that and to move down that path, you have to be very willing to throw away things and say, no, this isn't the best thing. Like, we're not working on the best thing anymore. We need to just, you know, start over or like take this other idea and not get fixated on things.

[Anna Rose] (17:47 - 18:06)
So one of the things we haven't really done yet is explain what near protocol is. But maybe it's challenging to do so because like, it sounds like the way you've just described it, it's not necessarily like there's one main feature that differentiates it, but why don't you explain, explain to us what near protocol is?

[Alexander Skidanov] (18:06 - 18:57)
Okay. So, so near protocol, we usually, as Illia mentioned at the beginning, near protocol mission is to build the most usable blockchain, a blockchain on which people can actually build applications and other users can use them. And it has many aspects, one of which is scalability, right?

So the blockchain, which powers applications for a decentralised web, it needs to be scalable. So sharding is one big part of near, and that's one of the biggest areas of research we do here. But we also do a lot of other improvements on the UX side so that people can actually use it.

So we can cover sharding first. And I will, I will presume that the listener doesn't know anything about sharding. So they didn't read, you know, our stuff.

And so sharding, generally, the way you look at it is, you know, you had one blockchain before, and it was slow. Now you have 10 blockchains, each of them as fast as the one. Now you're 10x faster.

[Anna Rose] (18:57 - 18:58)
If you connect them.

[Alexander Skidanov] (18:58 - 23:36)
Sort of. Yes. And so the connect, connect them is sort of one hard part.

And another hard part is how do you keep them secure? Because, you know, if you get blockchain, Bitcoin Cash, and you split it into Bitcoin Cash and Bitcoin, the other one, the hash power in each of them is now twice as little, right? So corrupting any of them is twice as little.

So Bitcoin, the other one again splits. That is, each of them will not be as secure as the original one. And if you read less sophisticated sharding papers, I will not be naming names, they usually think from perspective of how we can prevent forks on the shards.

And that can, that's a very simple problem. Everybody, everybody uses the same solution, which is, let's have one huge blockchain, which is overarching all the small blockchains. And the large blockchain has the full security of the system.

And the small blockchains will be snapshotting, like they produce blocks and every now and then they will snapshot the block to the large one. And you cannot fork beyond that point. And so now if you want to fork a small blockchain, you need to fork a big blockchain.

This is how Cosmos Hub operates. This is how I'm pretty sure Relay Chain works in Polkadot. This is Beacon Chain in Ethereum.

And that problem sort of solved, but many people don't, who design sharding, they don't pay as much attention to two bigger problems. One of which is that, you know, today, if you run a full node in Ethereum, you validate every block. And that means that if someone creates an invalid block, that invalid block, nobody will ever respect it.

People will just look at it, they will see it as invalid, they will discard it. And in sharding, you cannot do that anymore. You cannot, the entire premise of sharding is that nobody can validate all the shards.

And so you will end up in a situation where, in a particular shard, you sort of have to trust people who validate the shard. You have to trust the algorithm that selects validators, that it is sufficiently robust, so that the validators, so that malicious actor cannot assign too many of their validators to the shard. And you need to trust whatever those validators sign in the shard.

And so if the shard is corrupted in some way, they actually can create an invalid block now. And the Beacon Chain, or Relay Chain, or Hub, they cannot do anything about it, because all they can do is validate headers. They don't have capacity themselves to validate every block.

And so that becomes a huge problem. And very few projects directly address it. So if you go through the materials available, you will see it's Polkadot who addresses it directly.

It's Ethereum. I think it's Telegram Open Network. It's been a while since I read it.

And that's practically it. So most of the other sharded projects that you see, they either pretend it doesn't exist at all, or they say, you know, that's very unlikely that the shard will be corrupted, so we can completely ignore the problem as well. And that problem, it sort of goes side by side with another problem, which is called Data Availability Problem, which is even if you find a way which provides better, like you find a way to have more people validate the shard, or like have external people who sort of have incentive to validate the shard.

It only works if they can actually get the blocks produced for the shard. And what a malicious actor can do is they can produce an invalid block, send the header to the beacon chain or to the light clients, but never disclose the block. And so nobody sees the block, nobody can validate it.

No matter which techniques you have to ensure the validity of the block, all those techniques fall apart if the block is not available. And that's a bigger problem. This is a thing where Polkadot, that's what we took from Polkadot effectively.

Polkadot has a great solution for data availability, and we just, like we practically use the same one effectively now. Ethereum also has a decent one, but Ethereum is less coherent. Ethereum just put a lot of small techniques that together give you meaningful sort of certainty that data is available, while in Polkadot it's very specific.

You know exactly what needs to happen for data not to be available, who needs to, how many people will get slashed. So I think Polkadot's approach there is just, it's the best we have today in the industry. So it makes sense just to use it.

Yeah. And so we, our entire design, why it took us so long is that we were thinking, how do we solve this problem? So until April, we were struggling.

And in April, we sort of finally figured out a design which sort of addresses them. So we have this paper that describes it in detail. We might cover it today in less detail.

But the entirety of our design revolves around how do you solve data availability and state validity in a coherent way so that people who use the network, they, they certain that, you know, after 100 years, every single shard only had valid state transitions.

[Frederik] (23:36 - 23:49)
You were talking about this, you know, most other protocols having like a relay chain or a beacon chain. You're talking about this as if you don't. So do you have some other way of coordinating these shards?

[Alexander Skidanov] (23:50 - 24:42)
Right. So I actually think it's exactly the other way around. We only have the beacon chain.

So the biggest thing we changed in the design, which I think is a huge simplification compared to many other sharded designs, is that we only have one blockchain, which we call main chain sometimes to avoid confusion in the context of other sharded protocols. So we have the main chain. And on the main chain, every block logically has all the transactions for all the shards.

Right. So it's a chain of huge blocks where every block could be so big that nobody can download it. But, but physically the block is split into smaller chunks, one per shard.

And so people download those chunks and then like every, most of the things happen on the chunk level. So you can think of it as like small shard chains consisting of chunks, but that's not how we look at it. We look at it as one huge blockchain, which, which contains those logical humongous blocks.

[Frederik] (24:43 - 24:47)
It almost looks a little bit more like a traditional database sharding solution then.

[Alexander Skidanov] (24:47 - 25:11)
Yes. I don't know why could that happen to our protocol. But this, this, this is a huge simplification because you only have one fork-choice rule in the entire protocol.

You only have one finality gadget if you have one. Right. So it simplifies so many things.

And, and then reasoning about security, reasoning about the design is significantly easier. Right. Which is, I guess it's very important for people who try to assess the security for themselves to figure out if they want to use the protocol.

[Illia Polosukhin] (25:12 - 25:31)
It was repeatedly where, where we were trying to figure out something like that is way too complex. Let's simplify this. Let's simplify this until it's like easy that you can explain it in like 10 minutes.

And that like, that's a general goal because if you think of like successful blockchain so far, they have been like extremely simple.

[Anna Rose] (25:32 - 25:51)
You just mentioned that it ended up looking a little bit like a traditional database sharding setup, but like, is that, do you find as you're going through this process that you understand better why those decisions were taken back then when that was being developed? Like, do you actually feel like this is helping you understand like computer science history?

[Alexander Skidanov] (25:52 - 25:58)
I think in the database world sharding is, is easier. There was no unsolved problems there, though I wasn't, I wasn't back then.

[Anna Rose] (25:59 - 26:03)
It's hard to tell. No, I'm sure that there was unsolved problems that they solved. It's just solved now.

[Alexander Skidanov] (26:04 - 27:37)
So there are, there are in general, very few sharded databases actually. And many of them, like in 2011, when we started building msql, the space was the same. There was MongoDB and MongoDB will be Zilliqa.

It's a very popular database, which technologically is very meh. And there was msql, which was sort of near, which was, it was a very good technology, but it didn't have that sort of, I call it questionable marketing, right? It didn't have questionable marketing.

And it unrolled, I think, better for msql than for MongoDB on the long term. So it's hard to tell. MongoDB is also doing pretty good.

Right. But in general, sharding, sharded databases, they generally exist within Google, within Facebook, and very few of them are externally facing. And their designs are mostly kind of similar.

So if you look at even Mongo, msql, Cassandra, all of them, it's sort of similar. And it's sort of what you would come up with if you just sit without having any knowledge and think how you would shard a database. So it's not, I don't think there's anything groundbreaking there.

And the same actually goes to blockchains, right? We came up with near design before we talked to Ethereum, then we talked to Ethereum and design was the same. And if you talk to other network, their design is the same.

And they started also before Ethereum published their materials, so that's sort of that hub and spokes. This is what you would come up with if you just sit with a pen and paper and try to figure out sharding. It's the little details like state validity, which are hard.

[Anna Rose] (27:38 - 27:45)
So far, we've been talking about sharding. What about the usability? What does that mean to you guys when you say you want it to be usable?

[Illia Polosukhin] (27:45 - 30:42)
This actually has two components of it. We are engineers ourselves. We tried to build a company before.

So a lot of it is kind of coming from perspective of, can I build a company? Can I build an application on this as a developer, as an entrepreneur? And right now, the answer is no.

We have seen a lot of people trying and the only thing that actually succeeded even to some extent is gambling. So a lot of it is like, how can we solve these problems? How can we, first of all, make this easy to use for an engineer?

The first time I tried to use Ethereum, the first time I came to a hackathon, it took me six hours just to set up everything. And while I was setting up, I also was reading all the blog posts about Solidity because there's no documentation in one place, at least at that point. So this is all the small issues.

And that's the same thing I learned before working on TensorFlow. The underlying engine can be amazing. If you cannot communicate it through simple principles to the end developer, in this case, they will not be able to use it.

So you will be only marketing for a very small number of developers. So that's the first thing we focused on is how can we make developers onboard really fast, iterate really fast, and over time actually build a business out of it. So right away, we built an online IDE, which is kind of a fiddle-like where you can go to URL right now, nir.dev. You can create a project from a template, and you can launch your first application on NIR in 15 seconds. So that actually will deploy on testnet, will pull up the full frontend, and you can interact with the application. And from there, you can start iterating. We use WebAssembly as kind of already, I think, generally accepted VM.

But on top of it, we've been working very closely with this team called AssemblyScript that actually compiles TypeScript, which is JavaScript with types, into WebAssembly. And this pretty much unlocks web developers, frontend developers, full stack developers who know how to write in JavaScript, who know Node.js, who know React, to start building applications. So that's a huge market, right?

There's millions of people who know JavaScript. And then at the same time, we're actually trying to figure out what are the business models that people can have, right? We talked with actually a lot of developers as well.

We're not just talking about projects and protocols, but also we're trying to figure out what are the missing pieces actually on the application layer. So a lot of it is people want to pay for transaction fees for their users because they want to charge them in some other way. Some of them instead want to charge users more than the usual transaction fee to kind of accumulate more reward from that.

So all of this is kind of implemented on a protocol level in our case.

[Anna Rose] (30:44 - 31:00)
It sounds like there's a few projects, there's echoes of a few projects that we've come across in the past. The templating, is it similar to maybe what Zeppelin was doing? Is the usability for JS developers a little bit like what Agoric has been proposing?

[Alexander Skidanov] (31:01 - 31:03)
Yeah, and Porky's and a couple others.

[Anna Rose] (31:03 - 31:09)
Yeah, this is interesting. I can sort of see that you're pulling together a few of these unique features.

[Illia Polosukhin] (31:10 - 31:58)
From our perspective, we're talking with everybody and we're trying to get the best ideas, but in my head, at least, it's more of a stack, right? If you go to develop on Google Cloud or Amazon Cloud, yes, you get a raw machine and that was kind of their success, but really you get a full stack of different layers of infrastructure, right? And if you think of it, they actually didn't launch AWS without a front end, right?

They launched AWS front end and actually command line, I think, coming later. Right now, existing blockchains come in the other way. They come in with somewhere we have a cloud, a blockchain, and then here's a command line that somewhat works and then figure it out.

Huh.

[Alexander Skidanov] (31:58 - 32:41)
But also on Ethereum, all those projects, they solve many problems independently, but those projects work very, very badly together, right? So someone, I was talking a few days ago with someone who was using Loom network because Ethereum is too slow, so they were using Loom, but they were also using, I think, Portis so that people can use it easier, but Portis and Loom were not cooperating together, right? And so if they also want to use meta transactions, well, now they have three of those together, right, that need to work together.

And so if they all exist on the protocol level from day one, that's significant easier for the developer because they don't need to connect multiple independent libraries, which are not necessarily designed with each other in mind.

[Frederik] (32:42 - 33:27)
Yeah. I mean, I feel like a lot of these issues are an issue of time, and I wonder how you see that where you are right now, and Ethereum is coming out of this space, completely agree. It comes from a very developer-centric view of like, yeah, you ship CLI first and just hope that people use it for good things.

But then as it's grown, it's a decentralised project. We want to encourage as many people to contribute to as many things as possible. You could build a better, more coherent product in UX if it's one company shipping everything for this whole ecosystem.

But then you're going against the values of the community and wanting everything to be decentralised. So how do you find that balance?

[Alexander Skidanov] (33:28 - 35:39)
It's different values. Decentralisation of the protocol itself is the biggest value that it provides. Decentralisation of development is desirable, but it's very slow, as we can see, right?

So Ethereum, if you look at how Serenity is being developed, they have very strong teams working on it, but it's still very slow because the effort is decentralised. There's always going to be some time penalty for decentralisation. And so at least in the early days, the protocol will benefit a lot if the development is centralised.

And the problem there that needs to be solved, the only problem that needs to be solved, is how do you have centralised development on a decentralised protocol? And that we're doing in a way through, like, effectively, we have this concept called decentralised maintainer, no, benevolent maintainer for now, which is, it's a play of words, right? On benevolent dictator for life.

But benevolent maintainer for now is the entity which is, it's on the protocol level, there's an entity which does the development. And there are upgrades sort of on the protocol level, not as hardcore as Polkadot, where you can roll out a binary on the protocol level. In our case, it's more of, on the protocol level, you can say which binary needs to be rolled out, right?

People still need to do it manually. And there's some time when people can say that people have to review the changes to agree on them. And for as long as NearInk is behaving reasonably and not doing anything stupid, people will be, like, the updates are going to be rolling out.

And if at any point we go wrong, people can just vote us out. And there are multiple levels of how that can happen. But effectively, for as long as we're doing a good thing, people will continue keeping NearInk as the developer.

And then at the end of the day, it can always move to decentralised. Even if we don't do anything wrong, people at some point can say, okay, near protocol is sufficiently developed. We don't benefit as much from the pace of the development anymore.

It's good to reduce the risk, right? Because still, it could be that we're shipping something reasonable, but like slightly biassed towards what we want, right? So at some point, people might want to move to completely decentralised development.

But early on, Ethereum didn't cross that line at which decentralised development actually helps it. At this point, it still definitely hurts it.

[Frederik] (35:40 - 36:00)
It sounds like a similar story to the Zcash company where it's kind of took on, you know, we're shipping this over the next two years and got the founder's reward for that. And then now, like a couple of years in, they're kind of going, well, maybe we should involve a foundation and some other parties to start decentralising this.

[Anna Rose] (36:00 - 36:06)
So like, actually on that topic, though, is near protocol a company? Is it an Inc?

[Illia Polosukhin] (36:06 - 36:10)
So near protocol itself will be a Swiss foundation.

[Anna Rose] (36:10 - 36:11)
Okay.

[Illia Polosukhin] (36:11 - 37:11)
And like, we still figure, like, the idea of how to organise governance, like that's unsolved problem. I mean, I'm sure you guys have guests talking about this here. And the goal is like at the end to have a decentralised governance that actually operates.

So far, we have not seen anything working. Like we're talking with, you know, people who are working on this. And I think we actually may talk about, like, there will be some interesting conversations about it at WAP3 coming up.

But before that is done, we kind of will go same way as Ethereum. So it will be a foundation. And it will be sponsoring, in this case, Banelad Maintainer, which is near Inc to continue development.

It was the goal of eventually decentralising it and eventually kind of both removing Banelad Maintainer. That's why it's for now. But also getting a lot more different teams involved in this on different levels.

[Alexander Skidanov] (37:11 - 37:16)
And near Inc is a Delaware company, which operates from California. So it's separate.

[Anna Rose] (37:16 - 37:25)
And there's a near token, I guess. Yes. Do you guys have any sort of founder reward or block reward built into it?

Or are you thinking of that?

[Illia Polosukhin] (37:26 - 37:36)
So it is proof of stake. And in proof of stake, you actually need to launch with what we call 100% of tokens. So whatever is launched, that is 100% of tokens.

[Alexander Skidanov] (37:37 - 37:42)
And then well, you don't have to, you can still have limited supply, but I don't believe in limited supply.

[Illia Polosukhin] (37:43 - 38:02)
Yeah, well, the thing is like all the miners reward will go to validators, which are token holders already. By doing miner reward, you're not getting more people. So really, you need to distribute kind of from the beginning.

That's one of the hardest part of proof of stake. So we kind of like have some allocation from that initial supply.

[Anna Rose] (38:03 - 38:08)
And you would then become validators in order to continue funding the operation?

[Alexander Skidanov] (38:09 - 38:11)
If we want to. Yeah.

[Frederik] (38:12 - 38:24)
What's your token distribution? How are you planning to actually get the tokens into as many hands as you want? Because like you said, that's a fundamentally very hard problem.

[Alexander Skidanov] (38:25 - 39:10)
It is, yeah. So I think our token distribution is one of the most... We have, I think, one of the least allocations to investors of all the protocols being built, though I'm still not very happy with it.

But we have 15% that went to investors. And we have 12 to the team. Yes.

Everything else we want to... For everything else, we don't have the exact protocol yet, but the goal is to have distribution such that from the perspective of an external observer, it is clear that it was done in a decentralised way, that it's a very wide distribution. So it could be some of them can be sold with KYC with very little checks.

Some of that can be log drop on Ethereum. Some of them can be airdrop on old GitHub and Reddit accounts.

[Illia Polosukhin] (39:11 - 39:34)
Yeah. One of the interesting things is we want to go over all of the GitHub repositories that we use as dependencies for our protocol, which includes, I don't know, maybe 20,000 different repositories. Find the people who contributed to them and actually give them the tokens, because they kind of were involved in building this, even though not directly.

[Frederik] (39:34 - 39:36)
That's a cool idea. Yeah.

[Illia Polosukhin] (39:36 - 40:05)
It's going to be a lot of manual work there, right? Some of it is manual, yes. And the handshake actually, it sounds like kind of interesting work already on how to organise this process as well.

But yeah, a lot of it is kind of just like through these procedures, figure out different slices of interesting audiences and either reward them or sell to them the tokens, obviously following all the regulations and rules.

[Frederik] (40:05 - 40:11)
I really like Handshake's distribution model. We should have a separate episode on that at some point.

[Alexander Skidanov] (40:12 - 41:39)
So there's another very interesting topic to discuss around token rewards, etc., which is one of the big values that blockchain provides in the context of OP3 is composability, in the sense that someone can build, we can now have a thing that we called open state services, right, which is a progression from open source, where you can have, for example, a social graph as a service, or some sort of a database as a service, where someone maintains it, but it's open state and everyone can use it, everyone can contribute to it, following some rules that are written in the smart contract, right? The problem with those, which is also a problem with open source today, is that monetising them would be super hard. If you have a social graph on the blockchain, like imagine launching it today on Ethereum, most likely the way you will monetise it is you're going to come up with some token, with some ridiculous token economy, which doesn't work naturally, and it will die out eventually, right?

So what we want to do is we want to build a system in which whenever a transaction is invoked, as some percentage of the transaction fee is distributed across all the maintainers of the smart contracts that were invoked as part of the transaction invocation, right? So if something depends on the social graph, there's a social network or there's some other application that uses the social graph, then every time it is invoked, a little part of the reward will go to the maintainer.

[Anna Rose] (41:40 - 41:42)
Of a specific smart contract.

[Alexander Skidanov] (41:43 - 41:44)
Yeah, or it could go to the smart contract.

[Illia Polosukhin] (41:45 - 41:49)
Exactly how it goes to the smart contract, and then the developer decides how it's allocated.

[Anna Rose] (41:49 - 41:50)
Oh, I see.

[Alexander Skidanov] (41:50 - 42:41)
Yeah, it could be a DAO that sits on top of it, which distributes it, or it could be a particular person who built it, who just put his key in there and it goes to him. And the idea here is that for many people today, you know, like if a person lives in the rural area of Russia, but they are a very good developer, that's actually a very meaningful thing for them to do, because developers are very pro-open source, pro-open state. That's something that correlates with their values a lot.

Way more than, you know, working on open source and building another CRM system, right? And so that's something they would love to do. And the money that will go to them through such a system is actually something that is meaningful for them.

If they launch multiple of them, they can actually make a living of that without any token models or anything like that. And without imposing this complexity on the user, so they don't have to pay a lemon coin to drink lemonade in the desert.

[Illia Polosukhin] (42:43 - 43:01)
On this note, we actually have a beta programme to pretty much get the early developers and early entrepreneurs into the ecosystem. And we help them both on kind of technical mentorship side connections and some rewards as like part of the initial distribution.

[Frederik] (43:03 - 43:43)
There's a lot of talk in the blockchain space about like unbanked banking, the unbanked and like talking about, you know, serving underserved communities. And there's very little action to actually show for that and that people actually try to do that or even intend to do that. But I mean, this actually sounds like a plausible approach to try to help people in countries who don't have stable income or like where where things are not as simple as, you know, in Sweden, where you have a perfect safety net and everything is jolly all day.

[Anna Rose] (43:43 - 43:46)
But cold. Maybe not now.

[Frederik] (43:47 - 44:53)
Yeah, so that's an interesting model. One thing I'm curious about is, you know, on a similar line, one of my pet peeves is actually addressing JavaScript developers, because like on one hand, I completely see the arguments in the case for it. Like we in Polkadot, like we're building a smart contract language in Rust, which has a very, very different type of audience.

And but we're still on WebAssembly. So we will eventually have JavaScript or TypeScript, like you said, smart contract language as well. And I'm really scared of getting JavaScript developers into smart contract development, as someone who's been bitten by massive bugs that, you know, you know, seemed trivial, or like, were actually, you know, hard to spot in some ways.

Yeah, it's just such a different mindset to go from like JavaScript development on a CRM app to writing a contract that manages a billion dollars or whatever.

[Illia Polosukhin] (44:54 - 45:03)
Well, not every contract needs to manage a billion dollars. That's kind of our point. Like, if you want to manage even millions of dollars, you should use Rust.

And we support Rust.

[Frederik] (45:04 - 45:27)
But the problem is that you don't know at the outset, like that was our problem with the multisig. Like we built it, because like, someone was gonna put 20 bucks in it, then the next day, there's $120 million in it. You don't know this upfront.

So how do you like if you start building your app in JavaScript, and it becomes super popular, it will manage hundreds of millions of dollars.

[Alexander Skidanov] (45:27 - 46:03)
At that point, there's always a risk, right? Even if you build it in Rust, you have a risk of messing it up, right? And so I don't think we can address that particular risk.

But the thinking more here is that JavaScript is very good for people to join and onboard and learn about the protocol, right? But for more serious projects, people should use not even Rust, but there are other languages being developed. There's Pact, which I don't know much about Pact, but Pact looks like a very interesting project.

And I don't know if it compiles to WebAssembly, but ultimately, even if it doesn't, it should be possible to make it.

[Frederik] (46:03 - 46:09)
Someone will make like a super nice, formally verified, whatever language for WebAssembly, I'm sure.

[Alexander Skidanov] (46:09 - 46:17)
And so ideally, you want everything that touches money to be formally verified. But many things in Web3 are not as crucial to not having bugs.

[Illia Polosukhin] (46:19 - 46:37)
Like in the example of a social graph, right? It's not like you're really managing metadata. And for that, you may have some money somewhere involved in around ecosystem, but like the main logic of the metadata doesn't need to actually carry such a restricted set.

[Anna Rose] (46:38 - 46:44)
Does NEAR, I mean, NEAR has a token, but does NEAR also have like a native language or a smart contract language of any sort?

[Illia Polosukhin] (46:45 - 47:08)
No, I mean, it's all WebAssembly. So any languages that compile to WebAssembly work. TypeScript with AssemblyScript compiler specifically is the language we have in our IDE and a lot of tooling we have, but we also support Rust.

So we have bindings for Rust. And then pretty much like a system can build any other bindings as well. It's relatively easy.

[Anna Rose] (47:09 - 47:19)
Going back to that question about building everything though, and like you talked about these different applications that don't work well together. So if you guys are building it, like how bigger is your team?

[Illia Polosukhin] (47:19 - 47:24)
How many people is in your... We're right now 21.

[Alexander Skidanov] (47:24 - 47:39)
I think it's 30 if you count all the remote people, like close to 30. It's between 20 and 30. Okay.

We're getting more and more decentralised in the world. And so now we don't have a single place where everybody's listed. Before it was easier.

[Anna Rose] (47:40 - 47:52)
But going back to that, you must still have to make choices and you can't possibly be building every piece of this all at once. So how are you making those trade-offs? What are you focussing on?

[Illia Polosukhin] (47:52 - 50:13)
So we focus on from perspective of what is a flow that as an end user I expect, right? So by end user here, I mean developer and a consumer, both. So as a developer, I want to have a flow where I land, I start building.

I don't want to build in the browser. That's weird. I start building locally.

I deploy the app. I share it with my friend. And then this friend actually can open this app, start using it without learning about blockchain, without learning about what the private keys are, all of this.

Without having tokens. Without requiring to buy tokens, going to exchange, going through KYC, right? Just start using the app, figuring out, oh, this is actually an interesting app.

And then like, oh, okay. If I want more functionality, I should go and buy tokens. So an example would be like, I'm building a chess app, right?

I land it on a page. I build up the thing. I'm like, hey, there's actually like interesting types of models I can build on top of it.

I cover the fees, but people pay, for example, per game or people bet or people do something else, right? I launch it. I send the link to my friend.

He clicks on it. He needs to sign up some way. So there's keys created and all this, but that's not shown to them.

And then they start using it. And then over time, they kind of figure out that, hey, for more functionality, you do this. And more security.

And more security. And for more security, you do the other way, right? So our accounts actually support a way to swap the keys that you have access to.

So you can actually, even though you maybe created an account on a not very secure place, you can actually upgrade your security by just swapping keys out. Or adding keys or permissioning keys. There's all kinds of functionality on that.

So that is kind of main flow that we're optimising for. And we want that. The way we call it is like a hackathon package.

You should be in two days. You should be able to build a full app, launch it, and get 10 of your friends working on it, using it. And then from there, everything else is kind of building the ecosystem, right?

And we're actually starting to involve external people as well as companies to help us with the ecosystem as well.

[Anna Rose] (50:14 - 50:32)
I kind of want to touch a little bit more on that concept of trade-offs. I had mentioned it sort of earlier on in this episode. You guys have hinted at a few of them.

So in this case, you're focused on UX and that flow. What do you think is the trade-off then? What aren't you doing?

What can't you do right now?

[Alexander Skidanov] (50:33 - 52:08)
I think the more interesting trade-off here is... I don't want to say what we're not doing because people like hearing negative things and then latch on them and it's going to be all over Twitter if someone doesn't like us after all. But an interesting trade-off here is that a good UX and good security do not go side by side.

It doesn't work out. There's a reason why Bitcoin is so unusable, is that you do need to understand the key management. You do need to instal external third-party software or ideally compile it from source and run if you want the security, right?

If we want to provide you with an incredible user experience where you open a website and interact with it, somewhere the security should be compromised, right? So we have this concept called progressive security, which effectively says when you join an application, like you start playing a game, you don't need the full security. You're not having $1 million worth of Bitcoin there or near tokens, right?

So at that point, you get reasonable security, meaningful security with some assumptions that a company, like hypothetical Coinbase, will not go rogue on you because that will hurt their business, right? But once you get assets you care about, once you have that crypto kitty whom you so much, you will not be able to lose it, you know, tolerate losing it, then you can actually move to proper security. You can instal the browser plugin or wallet application.

You can actually create your own key pair and understand how to manage it. But that all happens when you actually have assets you care about. And like today, you go to crypto kitties and they give you the list of steps you need to do before you play.

You don't have any kitties yet, right? You don't even know what it is.

[Anna Rose] (52:09 - 52:09)
It's not fun.

[Alexander Skidanov] (52:09 - 52:13)
Yeah, and suddenly you have to go through so many hurdles to get there.

[Anna Rose] (52:14 - 52:17)
Yeah, it's not only UX then what you're talking about there. It's also like just onboarding.

[Alexander Skidanov] (52:18 - 52:24)
Right, which is, you know, onboarding is part of UX. Yes, a big part of UX.

[Frederik] (52:24 - 53:04)
Yeah, and I'd say like onboarding is for sure the thing that normal people complain about most. I mean, just what you said earlier, going to an exchange and doing KYC just to get some token to be able to do anything is a terrible experience. And yeah, so I think onboarding there is an important thing.

So when I talked to you guys last year, I think it was you were talking a lot about like trying to have being able to validate on phones to have like micro loans to be able to enter into validation and then earn returns on those and pay back the loan. Is any of this remaining in the protocol?

[Alexander Skidanov] (53:05 - 53:05)
It's gone.

[Frederik] (53:05 - 53:06)
All right.

[Alexander Skidanov] (53:06 - 53:19)
It gets like many people when they talk about near, they constantly get it from somewhere. I don't know from where. There's nobody online where we mentioned it.

And people sort of like it. I don't know. Maybe we should.

[Illia Polosukhin] (53:20 - 53:33)
Well, I mean, we realise that practically it doesn't make sense right now because like we don't really need millions of devices. Yeah, we're not at that scale.

[Alexander Skidanov] (53:33 - 53:37)
The world is not at that scale of using blockchain yet to need millions of devices.

[Frederik] (53:38 - 54:13)
So follow up question there and on the trade-offs then is so like looking at one of your like randomness papers, there's a very interesting and like direct trade-off like directly in the abstract. It says something like we've designed a randomness protocol that doesn't need VDFs. It doesn't need DKG, but it has Ordo n-cubed network messages.

And that sort of means that, you know, it'll be extremely hard to have more than like 10 validators or 10 participants in this protocol.

[Alexander Skidanov] (54:13 - 54:20)
You can have a hundred because O of n-cubed means that each of them only receives or sends O of n-squared, which is like 10 kilobytes.

[Frederik] (54:20 - 55:00)
Well, it depends on how big the messages are. If there's 10,000 messages and they're all a kilobyte, then that'll max out any normal person's bandwidth. And like, yeah, it becomes maybe like, yeah, if they're, you know, well endowed machines and they are running in some sane data centre with a good connection, et cetera.

But that's like a very clear trade-off, right? Where Ethereum says, oh, we're going to have four million validators and blah, blah, blah. You know, how do you think about those kind of technical trade-offs?

You said already, like, we're not aiming at a million machines. So where do you place your, you know, what are you optimising for?

[Alexander Skidanov] (55:01 - 57:20)
So one quick thing about the randomness is that O of n-cubed is each person actually sends linear number of messages. Each of them is linear in size, right? So you send and receive 100 messages and each of them is on the order of 100 multiplied by the size of the encrypted message.

So like 32, three kilobytes, each message, 30 kilobytes, each person receives and sends. And this randomness, you don't do it very frequently, right? Because the primary use case is rotating validators.

So technically have a full day to do that, to execute the protocol. And so at that point, the n-cubed trade-off is way worth removing complex cryptography and cryptographic assumptions, right? Because DKG is a very complex protocol.

Even like the recent advances, they're still super complex. And I think VDFs are great. And once ASICs are there, that's something like clearly we will at least consider switching to them.

But today we need the beacon today, right? If we want to launch this year, we need the randomness beacon. And the protocol we have is very good.

And well, it's good enough. And it actually, it is reducible to n-squared with some complexity, but we don't need it yet. Generally, to answer the more general question, we target to have on the order of maybe 100 people per shard today.

So there are two different, like in Polkadot terms, there are collators and validators. We want to have on the order of 100 validators per shard, where 100 doesn't necessarily mean different entities, right? Because we cannot have identity on that level.

It means different stakes, right? So between those 100, some of them can intersect. We have fewer collators, because collators, the only thing they can do is stall.

And that is not as dangerous as allowing invalid state transition to go through. Yeah, so that's give or take the current thinking. And so the total number of block producers in the chain is also on the order of 100.

So 100 people in any given day create blocks for that day. The next day that you shuffle, I'll get the new 100 people. And early on, that's already...

I mean, we're not Ethereum. So the number of people whom we will have who will sufficiently care, that's approximately what we can get, right?

[Anna Rose] (57:20 - 57:34)
So where are you guys at right now with the project? We've heard a little bit of your history from like summer 2018. In April, you made a big shift.

Do you guys have a testnet? Where are you at?

[Illia Polosukhin] (57:34 - 58:12)
Yeah, so since February, we've been actually running testnets. So first testnet had like one node, but had like WebAssembly, runtime, IDE, all of this tooling. We had a bunch of like hackathons, actually, where people were building stuff on this, including non-blockchain hackathon, where we had like nine teams build some interesting applications.

And then underneath, we've actually been like iterating. And then since April, we've actually been running, right now, one shard with the idea of hard-forking that current testnet into multi-shard in a few weeks.

[Alexander Skidanov] (58:12 - 58:16)
Yeah, we wanted to do it in a week, but as usual, it is delayed a little.

[Illia Polosukhin] (58:17 - 58:54)
But yeah, so right now, if you look at our GitHub, like there's actually... I mean, everything is open, everything on GitHub. You can see our history of development and iteration as well.

But the kind of sharding is in a separate branch. We're pretty much stabilising it. And our master branch is what's launched right now on the testnet.

People can actually participate. There's documentation how to stake. But we're kind of not promoting it as of yet until we finalise sharding.

And then we're planning to launch our version of Games of Stake. So this will be kind of an interesting competition of people trying to break our network with some incentives to do that.

[Anna Rose] (58:54 - 58:56)
When do you have... When's your plan to do that?

[Illia Polosukhin] (58:57 - 59:03)
So the plan right now is September 15th. Oh, soon. Yeah.

[Alexander Skidanov] (59:03 - 59:12)
Well, we want to launch the mainnet before the end of the year. So we need to launch this. We call it Stake Wars.

We need to launch the Stake Wars sort of soon.

[Anna Rose] (59:12 - 59:25)
Well, you guys are definitely moving fast and you have a very productive energy. And it's been really great talking to you guys and learning about how this all works. So thank you so much for joining us.

[Illia Polosukhin] (59:25 - 59:29)
Yeah. Thanks a lot for inviting. It was a great conversation.

Cool.

[Alexander Skidanov] (59:29 - 59:43)
Thank you very much. Yeah. So make sure to check out our beta programme.

Right. If you're building applications, you should consider building them on Nier. Then actually people will be able to use them.

And you will, you know, your application will go to the moon. No, stretch that, stretch that.

[Anna Rose] (59:46 - 59:50)
All right. Well, thanks again, guys. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.

[Frederik] (59:51 - 59:51)
Thanks for listening.