[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 3:43)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, we are airing a live recording of our Quantum Question panel, our final session at the recent zkSummit14 event. This was held on May 7th in Rome. So this panel was really, really spontaneous.


Originally, it had been planned as a conversation with Justin Drake and Dan Boneh, with Nico and I as hosts, but Dan was coming straight from the airport to the stage and he had a delay in catching a taxi. We had a full house at zkSummit and folks were just waiting on this last panel and so we had to start without them. There was an empty seat on stage and given the spiciness of the topic, quantum computers and their threat to elliptic curve cryptography, a park bench / musical chairs format materialised in real time.


Dan did arrive partway through, you'll hear him actually arriving, but because we had already started this kind of hot seat musical chairs panel, we did have other guests join us after as well. Besides Justin, Dan, Nico and I, we heard from Daira-Emma Hopwood, Jens Groth, Patrick Towa and Sebastien Guillemot. People were coming on and off the stage, and new chairs were introduced.


It was quite chaotic, but also a lot of fun and very, very informative. This may be somewhat confusing in audio-only format, so you might want to check out the video for this one, just to understand kind of who's on the stage at what, at which point. In terms of the content, it was a very candid conversation about quantum timelines, the new strategies to achieve viable quantum computers, the quantum threat to blockchains, the quantum threat to cryptography and how we would even spot this.


The audience was a room full of cryptographers who it turns out were openly updating their mental models as they realised the time pressure. The time pressure, that is, if quantum computers actually do emerge as predicted. If you've been curious about quantum computers, if you've been worried about quantum computers, this one might be a good one for you to check out.


As mentioned, we have a video for this one. You can see that over on our YouTube channel. And I hope you enjoy.


So here is our quantum question panel from zkSummit14. So we are here for the final session on this stage. It's a panel with the topic being the quantum question.


Quite vague, quite open, maybe a little bit on purpose. The format of this is going to be interesting. We are awaiting one of the panellists, so we are going to kick off with a little bit of an introduction to the problem space.


I feel like most of the people here probably do know why quantum computers could disrupt the cryptography we know and love. But there are people watching at home that might not be as familiar. And so I kind of want to go back to the reason why we're even having this conversation.


What's the problem with a quantum computer for ZK? What's the problem with a quantum computer for blockchains, for general cryptography? But first I should introduce who's here.


So it's myself and Nico.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (3:44 - 3:44)
Hello, hello.


[Anna Rose] (3:45 - 3:50)
And our panellist, one of our panellists for now, Justin Drake.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (3:51 - 3:55)
Yeah, this is the highest moderator to panellist ratio you'll find.


[Anna Rose] (3:58 - 4:04)
Okay, so yes, that is the question. Why are we even afraid of quantum? What does it mean?


What will it do?


[Justin Drake] (4:04 - 5:14)
Absolutely. Thank you so much for having me on this IRL podcast. So the main issue with quantum is that they can take public keys and turn them into private keys.


So normally only the asset holder should be able to have the private key, but now anyone who has a sufficiently large quantum computer can have access to these private keys. But not only do the signatures break, but a bunch of other things break. So for example, the snarks that we know and love that are pairing based, things like Graph 16 and Planck, those break.


And even relatively sophisticated infrastructure like the Ethereum data availability will break. So that's based on KZG. So for Ethereum, we actually have in some sense one of the worst scenarios where we have three layers, each of which need to be updated.


At the consensus layer, we have BLS signatures. At the data layer, we have KZG. And at the execution layer, we have ECDSA signatures.


All of these have to be upgraded. All of them would break. All of them will eventually break, yes.


[Anna Rose] (5:14 - 5:21)
And that's just the way you're describing a quantum computer. You're talking about it as though it exists today.


[Justin Drake] (5:21 - 5:21)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (5:22 - 5:25)
But it doesn't. Like these aren't broken today.


[Justin Drake] (5:26 - 5:26)
Right.


[Anna Rose] (5:27 - 5:27)
Okay.


[Justin Drake] (5:27 - 5:34)
So they will be broken once we have a so-called ‘CRQC’, which is a cryptographically relevant quantum computer.


[Anna Rose] (5:34 - 5:34)
I see.


[Justin Drake] (5:35 - 6:11)
And in order to achieve cryptographic relevance, you need to achieve a certain amount of fault tolerance. So you need to be working with bits, basically. Right now, we have analogue quantum computers.


And the error correction to get from analogue to binary is actually non-trivial. And then once we do have fault tolerance, which we're basically almost there or even there, we need to scale to a sufficiently large number of so-called logical qubits. And for cryptography, we're talking roughly 1,000 logical qubits.


[Anna Rose] (6:12 - 6:18)
And where are we at? There are quantum computers today that are able to do something.


[Justin Drake] (6:18 - 6:18)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (6:20 - 6:25)
Yes? I've actually never been completely clear on that.


[Justin Drake] (6:26 - 7:05)
Yeah. So when you want to look at real quantum computers, you shouldn't be thinking in logical qubits. It's just a layer of abstraction which is too detached from reality.


You want to be looking at the nitty-gritty so-called physical qubits that are the equivalent of transistors for quantum computers. And it turns out there's different compilers to go from logical to physical. And one of the big breakthroughs just in the last couple of years has been unlocking this compilation which is a hundred times more efficient than what we had in the last few decades.


[Anna Rose] (7:05 - 7:06)
Okay.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (7:06 - 7:08)
I have opinions. Please.


[Anna Rose] (7:09 - 7:10)
Yeah. Sure.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (7:12 - 7:50)
Okay. So I am not an expert on the physics of this at all, but I've talked to people who are, and they say that the number of qubits is not really the problem because you can replicate a circuit. The size of the circuit is not the issue.


The issue is that there are still engineering problems with the error correction. But when you solve those engineering problems, the number of qubits is going to explode because the reason they're not making circuits, the large circuits at the moment, is not that they can't, it's that there's no point.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (7:51 - 8:09)
So maybe, can we introduce a lot of the concepts here? So we have our logical qubits which is, we know Shor's algorithm breaks discrete log. So that's written, we need a certain number of logical qubits, is that it?


Then physical is what we can build. We have a translation from one to the other. What's error correction and why do we need it here?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (8:10 - 9:06)
I mean, the problem as I understand it, is still getting, you solve one set of engineering problems and then you find another noise floor. Of course. And the noise floor is still too high to make a computer that actually works.


But I mean, the bet of the people who are working on this is that there will be a point at which you solve the last engineering problem that is needed to make them work. So I mean, that is why I think that, I believe the estimates that we need to be worried about upgrading all of our protocols within the next, well, protocol evolution takes a long time, so two years, in order to prepare for a break in the next four years.


[Anna Rose] (9:06 - 9:11)
We should hold on timeline because I feel like there's going to be lots of opinions here.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (9:11 - 9:12)
That's a big question.


[Anna Rose] (9:13 - 9:29)
But just going back to what you were describing, this history to the present, you had listed like an amount of, I forget what the value was, but it was like, this is what we need to break cryptography. What was that again?


[Justin Drake] (9:29 - 9:30)
A thousand logical qubits?


[Anna Rose] (9:31 - 9:33)
Yeah. So what do we have today?


[Justin Drake] (9:34 - 9:38)
So right now we don't really have logical qubits. At all. Right.


[Anna Rose] (9:38 - 9:41)
Okay. This is important, I feel.


[Justin Drake] (9:41 - 11:10)
So we have proof of concept demonstrations that we can do logical qubits and we can do error correction, but there's two things that really we need. One is the quality of the physical qubits to be good enough, and this is measured in so-called fidelities. And what we need for practical error correction is 3.9. So for every 1,000 operations, you need your gate to work 999 times. And for most platforms now, so if you take trapped ions or neutral atoms or superconducting, we're now at this point of 3.9 of fidelity. So that in some sense is solved. The other kind of big issue is so-called real-time decoding, where in order to do the error correction many times per second, maybe 1,000 times per second, you're going to be measuring these dummy qubits that will tell you whether or not there are errors, and then based on what you measure, you need to be applying real-time corrections.


And this is a purely classical problem that needs to be done in ultra-low latency, and the engineering just hasn't been done yet. You need to use basically FPGAs and GPUs, and you need to develop these low-latency decoders. And for some reason, like the physics is ahead of the, like the quantum physics is ahead of the classical algorithms at this point in time.


[Anna Rose] (11:10 - 11:19)
The classical algorithm side doesn't need a quantum computer to be developed. Correct. Like this can run on the hardware that we have today.


[Justin Drake] (11:19 - 11:20)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (11:20 - 11:20)
Okay.


[Justin Drake] (11:22 - 11:38)
And in a sense, there's a little bit of an analogy here with ZK where, you know, real-time proving was this very difficult thing to do, and we got it, and now, you know, it just needs to be some teams that do the same thing for real-time decoding in quantum.


[Anna Rose] (11:39 - 11:46)
Is that what those labs are working on? Like does Google have a team doing that?


[Justin Drake] (11:47 - 14:25)
Yes. So a lot of the teams are working on quantum error correction and decoders, but a lot of the different teams are working on the different physics for the so-called different modalities. And I happen to have a favourite modality, which is the so-called neutral atoms.


And there's kind of two reasons why I really like neutral atoms. The first one is that they have this superpower called reconfigurability, so you can take two qubits and move them physically to be close to each other, and then you can entangle these two. So if you have, for example, 10,000 qubits, you can pick qubits that are far away and just have all-to-all connectivity, and that means that your compilation from logical to physical is about 100 times more efficient.


So if you have superconducting qubits where they only have nearest neighbour connections, so in a grid, they're only connected to the four nearest neighbours, your ratio of physical to logical is going to be 1,000 to 1. So that's what Daira was saying, that if you take a shore which has 1,000 logical qubits and you have another 1,000 to 1, you're going to end up with a million qubits, which there's no way you're going to fit on a single quantum processor. A single quantum processor can only fit roughly 10,000 qubits.


So if you want to run shore, for example, on superconducting platforms, you're going to have to do networking, quantum networking. And this is a thing that we haven't really solved. So in the context of neutral atoms, you don't need networking because you only need 1,000 times 10, which is 10,000, and we can fit 10,000 qubits on a single neutral atom processor.


And then the other reason why I'm bullish about neutral atoms is that it's much easier to get to the number 10,000. So if you look, for example, at superconducting qubits, today they can only fit a few hundred, and part of the reason is because they have all of these yield, they have to fabricate the qubits, and they have all these yield issues, and as soon as you scale, the yield basically goes to zero. And it's just very difficult.


And then there's this other platform called trapped ions, where basically you have these charged particles, and they don't like being close to each other, they repel each other. So it's very difficult to get 10,000 in a single box.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (14:25 - 14:46)
So for the neutral atom platform, so you're talking about physically moving the atoms from one place to the other. This is not something that we do in conventional integrated circuits. So how difficult is that in practise, and in particular, how difficult is it maintaining coherence?


[Justin Drake] (14:47 - 15:26)
Yeah, so in 2021, I believe it was the Harvard group that showed a Mario animation where there was 16 by 16 grids, so 256 qubits, and it was just showing Mario moving as a video. And so you can control the qubits extremely well, and it takes just a few milliseconds to move them from one place to another. And the decoherence that comes from the movement is actually well below the threshold that you need to do error corrections.


That's not the bottleneck.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (15:27 - 15:50)
Okay. Yeah. Cool.


So that, a few milliseconds, that would be the cycle time, but I guess for an algorithm like Shor, where you have an exponential speed up, well, technically you have an exponential speed up for Grover as well, but where kind of it's just polynomial in the security parameter, you don't need that many cycles, right?


[Justin Drake] (15:51 - 16:14)
Yeah. So you need about 100 million cycles. So the expensive cycles are called like, well, the expensive gates are called Toffoli gates.


You have roughly 100 million of them. Each one will consume roughly one millisecond or so. And then you end up with roughly 10 days of computation to run Shor.


Okay.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (16:14 - 16:16)
I was just trying to work that out in my head, yeah, that's about right.


[Anna Rose] (16:17 - 16:27)
Okay. So we're going to do a little shift on this panel because we just had one of our guests arrive. Hi.


Daira, do you want to stay?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (16:28 - 16:29)
Yeah. Okay.


[Anna Rose] (16:30 - 16:32)
Perfect. Can we have another seat?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (16:32 - 16:32)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (16:33 - 16:44)
All right. I want to welcome Dan Boneh to the stage, the guest of my 400th episode as well. What an entrance.


Hi. You just got off a plane.


[Dan Boneh] (16:44 - 16:45)
I literally just landed two hours ago.


[Anna Rose] (16:46 - 17:43)
Thank you so much for coming. Rushed over here as quickly as I could. Thank you so much for coming.


So just to bring you up to date on what we've talked about so far, we were really looking at like, you know, what are quantum computers? What can they actually potentially do with cryptography? But what do you need in a quantum computer to actually achieve that?


And then we were trying to figure out what exists today on the theory, but also what exists in practice. Justin just introduced neutral atoms. We kind of started to give a little bit of the distinction—we started to distinguish between the different types of quantum computers.


I did want to say something that I think we said on our show, which is like when you see quantum computers in the news, when you see this thing with all these wires, that is the superconducting version of quantum computers. And what you were talking about with neutral atoms is something else. What do those look like?


[Justin Drake] (17:45 - 18:36)
So neutral atom quantum computers are in an enclosure of roughly one cubic metre. There's no fancy cooling, it's just lots of lasers and lenses. And in the middle, there is this very small vacuum chamber, which is maybe one cubic centimetre.


And then within the vacuum chamber, you have these atoms floating, which are like roughly one cubic millimetre. And one of the cool things is that it's mostly off-the-shelf optical equipment. And the total cost of the machine will be a couple million dollars.


When you compare this to the superconducting platform, you know, each of these wires that you talked about, there's at least one per qubit, actually multiple. And each wire costs about $1,000. So if you need a million qubits to run Shor, that's billions of dollars just in the wiring right now.


Wow. All right.


[Dan Boneh] (18:36 - 18:47)
The difference is that it's much faster. So the superconducting qubits are faster computers than the neutral atoms, but they have other problems like connectivity and so on. I don't know if you already talked about that.


[Anna Rose] (18:47 - 18:54)
Well, I think Justin, you listed the things you liked about neutral atoms, but I don't know if we shared these sort of disadvantages.


[Justin Drake] (18:55 - 19:39)
Yeah, so neutral atoms are great at everything except one thing, which is the cycle time. They're about a thousand times slower. So for Q-Day, you know, what will mark Q-Day, I think more likely than not, it will be something like neutral atoms and unlikely to be superconductors.


But in the long term, we want our computers to run extremely fast. And so that's very bullish, the faster platforms. There is another disadvantage of neutral atoms, which is the so-called fidelities.


So there's some platforms like trapped ions that achieve four nines. And if you go below three nines, significantly below three nines, then you gain a lot. But neutral atoms have three nines and that's good enough for error correction.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (19:40 - 19:48)
You said floating. This seems like another fundamental difference from conventional circuits.


[Justin Drake] (19:49 - 20:17)
Yes. So you have these optical tweezers, which are basically beams of light where the atoms like to stay where the light focusses. And there's different types of tweezers, but one of them is called a bottle, where basically you surround the atom with light and the atom is kind of repelled on all sides by the bottle.


Wow.


[Anna Rose] (20:17 - 20:42)
All right. So now that we've done this primer on quantum, types of quantum, let's bring it back to cryptography and breaking it or not. Like there have been the idea of a post-quantum cryptography was presented many, many years ago, I think.


Actually who first was working on that? Was it like the Stark team?


[Dan Boneh] (20:42 - 20:54)
There are many paths to post-quantum cryptography. I mean, there's like five or six different paths. And so you can't really say when exactly.


I think as soon as Shor's algorithm was introduced, people started thinking about what do we do.


[Anna Rose] (20:54 - 20:55)
And they started to make this.


[Dan Boneh] (20:56 - 21:00)
Microphone closer. Oh, sure, sure. Microphone close.


Okay.


[Anna Rose] (21:00 - 22:03)
But, okay. So yeah, like what do we, like there's a question, which is the hot button question, I think here. Actually there's two questions.


One is, do we think there will really be quantum computers? Do we need to be worried? And the other is when, if so.


And so on this panel, I think I actually, so we worked really, we were talking to each of you, I don't know, in the audience, we were trying to find someone who really didn't believe that quantum computers would ever exist. And we actually didn't find that person. You might be here, but we didn't get a chance to talk to you.


We will open up the floor after. So if you do feel that way, we want to hear it. We were looking for someone to join us on this panel who was very bearish, who felt that quantum computers will remain in theory for a long time, that we can rely on the cryptography we have today.


On this panel today, I just want to check, do any of you believe that? Do you think that quantum computers will never happen?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (22:04 - 23:57)
So my position is that we have to assume that they will. Actually that's been my position for a long time, but we have to upgrade the protocols anyway. I also believe that they will happen, but that almost isn't relevant for cryptographic engineering.


We need to update the protocols. And it turns out that we get simpler protocols, because they just use symmetric cryptography more often, and so we should use this as an opportunity to simplify. If I take Zcash as an example, so Sprout is a lot, actually, ironically closer to being post-quantum.


It's just the proof system that is vulnerable, not the thing that you're proving. The cryptography of the payment protocol is just based on hash-free images. And then, when we went to Sapling in order to optimise it, there was an observation, which I think comes from the COCO paper, that actually doing elliptic curve cryptography over the right fields and curves is very efficient in circuits.


So we took advantage of that, and we needed to because the Sprout circuit was really inefficient. But at that point, we didn't have algebraic hashes that we were confident in. So that was the reason why we went to elliptic curve cryptography within the circuit.


Now that we have things like Poseidon, so despite the recent cryptanalysis of Poseidon 2, Poseidon 1.1 is fine. Just use it. It's fine.


[Anna Rose] (23:57 - 24:01)
So now that there are hash functions, you would probably just go with that?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (24:01 - 24:39)
Now we know how to do a lot of fancy cryptography just using symmetric primitives. We don't need them for payment protocols. We don't need them for a lot of other things.


So we should go back to using that in the post-quantum world. We still do need semi-structured things like lattice-based cryptography. But I don't think we'll miss elliptic curves and RSA and discrete log over finite fields.


[Anna Rose] (24:39 - 24:51)
This is surprising to have Jarrah here saying this, because a few years ago, you didn't feel that way. And of the people here, were you the most bearish up until recently?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (24:51 - 25:23)
I was quite bearish, but also I contributed to Sphinx, which became SphinxBus, which became SLH DSA, which is now standardised. So I obviously was thinking that this is something that we needed to worry about. But I was quite skeptical that we would even be able to get to the first step of Shor's algorithm, which is to create a uniform distribution over qubits.


[Anna Rose] (25:23 - 25:38)
This makes me want to ask now, is there anyone in this audience who does not believe that a quantum computer, or who does not think a quantum computer will ever truly exist? That it will remain in the realm of theory? And it's okay to put your hand up.


[Dan Boneh] (25:39 - 26:52)
Actually, I do feel like I need to address that, to be honest, because these are just opinions. At the end of the day, we don't really know. I mean, quantum computers are n years away for an unknown value of n.


Whatever opinion you hold, you could be wrong. And do we really want to bet the world financial system on an opinion that could be wrong? And so I totally agree that it doesn't really matter at this point whether these computers will exist or not.


The fact that it's a threat, and the fact that it erodes trust in the blockchains, means we have to adapt. I can tell you that one of the things that's most depressing to me is if we make the shift and we move away from our beloved elliptic curves, and move to far less efficient systems, and then a hundred years go by and still quantum computers don't exist, I think that would be a crazy depressing world to be in. So if we make the shift, we do all this effort to transition all the blockchains to systems that are harder to use, for me, harder to teach.


It better be that quantum computers are real and they're coming, otherwise what the heck.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (26:52 - 27:07)
Okay. I am more optimistic about this world where we never get quantum computers, where we have all of the complexity in our protocols. Because as I pointed out, we add complexity in some places and we remove it in others.


So it's all actually a bit of a wash.


[Anna Rose] (27:09 - 27:15)
Jens, you just put your hand up. I'm wondering, maybe, would we be able to switch places? Do you want to join?


[Dan Boneh] (27:16 - 27:18)
Or do you want to just ask a question?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (27:19 - 27:22)
I will gladly yield to Jens' question.


[Anna Rose] (27:22 - 27:26)
This is an unusual panel to start, so why don't we keep going?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (27:27 - 27:29)
I hope somebody else will also have a comment.


[Anna Rose] (27:31 - 27:47)
This, by the way, is a bit of a throwback to a type of panel I used to do, which was called the park bench panel. We didn't necessarily start this panel with that idea, but this will be a hybrid. We might talk more about that.


Anyway, what are your thoughts here?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (27:47 - 28:00)
I think my question is, suppose quantum computers come about, what is actually going to be the impact? Post-quantum computers? Yeah, quantum computers.


Quantum computers.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (28:00 - 28:02)
Yeah. Post-quantum computers is the next step.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (28:03 - 28:20)
It's just so ingrained in my wiring. But I'm wondering what we should think about the consequence, right? Because as I see space, we have Shor's algorithm.


Shor can do things, we have Grover's algorithm, and then we don't have that much more, is my understanding.


[Dan Boneh] (28:21 - 28:43)
Actually, that's not quite true. We have a lot. In fact, there's a whole website, it's called the Quantum Algorithm Zoo, it's actually worth checking out.


There's a huge number of algorithms that we have. It's true that a lot of the problems are sort of algebraic in nature, so this stuff is very good... Well, you know, these things are very good at solving problems that have periodicity built into them.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (28:44 - 28:44)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (28:45 - 28:48)
So they're kind of algebraic in nature, but there's a huge number of problems that we can solve.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (28:48 - 28:58)
And would you say that they're sort of like different in nature from what Shor's algorithm can do? Is it like the derivative of that?


[Dan Boneh] (28:58 - 29:17)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. They go quite beyond Shor's. Shor's algorithm is pretty simple.


It's been 30 years, but now these algorithms have actually gotten much more complex, and I mean, they're still solving sort of computational number theory, computational algebra style problems, but yeah, it's worth checking out. Check it out. The Quantum Computing Zoo, Quantum Algorithm Zoo, it's a really cool website.


[Anna Rose] (29:17 - 29:25)
But I guess Shor's and Grover's, are those the only two that are relevant for blockchains? Grover's not relevant.


[Dan Boneh] (29:25 - 29:46)
It's really only Shor. Grover's not relevant. I hope everybody understands this.


So Grover gives you a quadratic speedup with a huge constant. The constant dominates the quadratic speedup for all real-world problems. The problem has to be unrealistic for Grover to become asymptotically practical.


[Anna Rose] (29:46 - 29:55)
So is Shor the only one? That affects cryptography? Not cryptography, but blockchains.


Like blockchains that we, popular ones.


[Dan Boneh] (29:56 - 30:26)
That's a tricky question. So it could be that tomorrow somebody discovers a lattice algorithm, a quantum lattice reduction algorithm, and then all the blockchains that rely on MLDSA and Falcon would be in trouble. So we don't know.


I would say the field of quantum computing right now is really at its infancy, because we don't have a computer. So the number of people who were writing code before computers existed, you could count on one hand.


[Anna Rose] (30:26 - 30:35)
Because that's what that is. It's an algorithm that would only work once a quantum computer exists. And you were saying there's this page full of all sorts of algorithms like that.


[Dan Boneh] (30:35 - 30:54)
But we haven't really, we've only begun, once the algorithms, once the computers exist, now there will be, you know, everybody and their uncle are going to start designing algorithms for these things. And then that's going to unleash a lot of ingenuity, creativity. And I think that's kind of where the applications will come in.


[Anna Rose] (30:54 - 30:57)
I did not realise that was the framing. This is very helpful.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (30:58 - 31:48)
So I can think of one other thing that's quite different in a quantum world. There was this beautiful work on commitment schemes, right, where the classical definition of a commitment scheme is that you can not create a commitment and two different openings to that, right? And where it's actually a little different in a subtle way in the quantum world, because you can imagine creating a commitment somehow in an entangled form of two openings and then you measure one of the openings and you reveal that later on.


But then, so like by the non-teleportation theorem of quantum theory, that means that the other opening is not accessible anymore. So you can sort of like, which is really weird to think about, right? It's a very subtle way that the classical way of thinking about commitment schemes fails.


[Anna Rose] (31:49 - 31:51)
It doesn't work there. It doesn't transfer.


[Dan Boneh] (31:54 - 31:55)
There's a lot to say about that.


[Anna Rose] (31:55 - 31:56)
Do you want to?


[Dan Boneh] (31:56 - 31:58)
No, we can move on.


[Anna Rose] (31:59 - 32:12)
Okay. So I will put the question again out there. Are there people who don't think that there's going to be quantum computers?


You? You have a remark?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (32:15 - 32:15)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (32:16 - 32:17)
Is he going to come up here?


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (32:17 - 32:18)
I don't know.


[Anna Rose] (32:23 - 32:24)
I guess, yeah, this is the hot seat.


[Patrick Towa] (32:24 - 32:26)
I wasn't planning on this.


[Anna Rose] (32:27 - 32:29)
This is what this panel is now. It's nice.


[Patrick Towa] (32:29 - 33:06)
So it's not really my opinion. It's actually the opinion of Serge Haroche. He's a French physicist who won the Nobel Prize in 2012.


And in 94, he wrote a paper called, I think it's Quantum Computing, Dream or Nightmare, in which he basically explained. Oh, by the way, he got the Nobel Prize for developing methods for measuring and manipulating individual quantum systems. So he knows what he's talking about.


And in 94, he wrote this paper saying basically that we will never have a useful quantum computer. I don't know if his opinion has changed. So my question was whether you know if his opinion has changed since 94.


[Justin Drake] (33:07 - 34:09)
So in 1994, which is the year that Shor was discovered, there was a whole debate. And the debate basically was around the quality of the qubits. In order to run Shor, you need really, really high qubits, high-quality qubits.


With fidelities on the order of like 10 to the minus 10 or 10 to the minus 12 or something. And no one believed that you can do that with naturally occurring qubits. And then what happened two years later in 1996 is that people discovered error correction.


And actually it was Shor who came up, I believe, with one of the first schemes. And then in some sense, that partially settled the debate. Where you can take these imperfect qubits and you can compile them in a way into bigger clusters such that the cluster is one virtual logical qubit.


And so I think this opinion from 1994 was pre-error correction. And it probably has been revised since.


[Dan Boneh] (34:10 - 34:42)
Actually, I will go along. Let's continue with the thought. So there is a group of people who object to quantum computers ever existing.


And the argument is, well, our understanding of quantum mechanics is wrong. And so nobody has ever done experiments with superpositions of so many particles. And it could be when we start to scale up the experiments, all of a sudden we discover new physics.


And Schrodinger's equation breaks down. Quantum mechanics is incorrect.


[Patrick Towa] (34:43 - 34:48)
Incomplete, maybe? Rather than incorrect, maybe incomplete.


[Dan Boneh] (34:48 - 35:14)
Yeah, that could happen. And I can tell you, if that happens, for example, there is a paper that just appeared last year that says the universe only has finite precision. So therefore quantum mechanics is only correct up to certain precision and not beyond that.


If that turns out to be true, then Shor's algorithm will never be implemented. The cool thing is we learn new physics. This is like a once-in-a-century discovery of new physics.


[Anna Rose] (35:14 - 35:17)
But we've just migrated all of these systems, Dan.


[Dan Boneh] (35:18 - 35:24)
Well, then we can migrate them back. BLS gets to live again. You have physics to teach us.


[Anna Rose] (35:24 - 35:27)
You want BLS to survive. Exactly.


[Dan Boneh] (35:28 - 35:42)
Actually, I have been thinking about this quite a bit, actually. What happens if we do the migration? We wait a hundred years and a quantum computer doesn't appear.


Do we migrate back? How long do we have to wait before we migrate back?


[Anna Rose] (35:42 - 35:53)
Also, won't all of those... The types of cryptographies, the efficiencies... There is progress on all fronts.


It's possible that they start to match the elliptic curve cryptography. Come back!


[Dan Boneh] (35:54 - 37:54)
By the way, that's not to say... I should say, by the way, my thinking has changed quite a lot. I used to be quite a sceptic about the construction of the computers just because of the very slow progress that we saw.


NMR methods don't scale. Other methods are noisy. I have to say, superconducting was a big step.


And then these neutral atoms... That has kind of changed my mind. Both Justin and I have been talking to a lot of the physicists who are building these systems.


I can tell you the conversations, they freak me out. This stuff is real. You read the papers.


They are running computers for many hours, maintaining coherence for many hours, across a large number of atoms. These machines are not difficult to build. One group says it's off-the-shelf equipment.


Another group says it's custom equipment, but relatively simple. You see there are over 10 startups now going after neutral atom architectures because they are so easy to build. It makes sense that startups would go down that path.


You see NVIDIA... By the way, I don't know if you brought this up, but quantum error correction, interestingly, is a hard classical computing problem. I don't know if people understand this.


One of the bottlenecks in building a sure quantum computer is actually the classical computation that has to be performed to do the quantum error correction. Right now, the gates operate at millisecond rates. The quantum error correction that Oratomic is reporting operates at seconds per gate.


This is a classical computation. A classical computation is slowing down the quantum computer. NVIDIA actually got into this game, and they said, we know something about speeding up classical computations.


Actually, they're hoping that this is a new market for the GPUs, basically running error correction for a quantum computer, which I think is pretty interesting.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (37:54 - 37:58)
This is a constant factor engineering problem. It's fine. Yeah, I agree.


[Dan Boneh] (37:58 - 38:30)
The only problem is classical computation. We'll solve that. I'm not worried.


Just right now, there is a compute problem. It's interesting to see how things are progressing there. Maybe I was playing devil's advocate.


Yes, maybe we will learn new physics, and Shor's algorithm will never be implemented. But when you talk to these guys, when you see the scale of the experiments they're doing... What was it?


The last one is 10,000 qubits? Oh. Oops.


Forget I said that.


[Patrick Towa] (38:31 - 38:35)
Forget you heard that. 10,000 logical qubits.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (38:36 - 39:31)
The other experience I've had that kind of has moved me towards the quantum computer as likely as possible is the experience of being wrong on AI. I made the prediction in 2000 that we would not have computers passing Turing tests until 2050 at the earliest. Clearly, I was wrong.


That experience of being wrong on a long-term prediction about technology has made me more cautious about things like quantum computing. A lot of experts seem to think that this is going to work, so I don't know the physics well enough to contradict that. And the fact that that fits in with we have to upgrade the protocols anyway, I think it's fairly clear what we should do.


[Dan Boneh] (39:32 - 41:33)
Actually, I want to make one more point, though. We talked about this in the show, but I want to bring it up to this audience and see their reaction. I do worry that there's a bit of a rush to post-quantum, and that rush to post-quantum is really quite dangerous.


There's an example I want to give. Actually, two points I want to make. The example I like to give, I don't know how many of you have heard me say this already, but let's just say it's a hypothetical example, even though it's not.


This company came and told me that they want to move to post-quantum. Today, their classical keys live inside of an HSM, but the HSM does not support MLDSA. So what do they do?


They take their keys out of the HSM and do the MLDSA in a CPU in the clear. The minute you do this, you are way more likely to be attacked by a regular hacker than by a quantum computer. That's the result of a rush to post-quantum.


So I want to caution people about the rush to post-quantum. The correct action, in my mind there, is don't take your keys out of the HSM, go lean on your HSM provider to provide MLDSA support as quickly as possible. This is why Google sets the 2029 deadlines, so they can lean on the hardware providers to say, because of you, we are not meeting our deadline, so you better get your act together.


That's the first point I want to make. The second point I want to make about the rush to post-quantum is even if you set 2029 as your target deadline, this is a bit delusional, because just last month Intel came out and said that their processor is going to be post-quantum only in 2030. So you might have migrated your system to be post-quantum, but the processor you are running on will accept microcode changes signed by a pre-quantum signature until 2030.


So just be careful. This is a very complicated process, and we should not rush it.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (41:33 - 41:49)
It is reasonable for your attack model not to include adversaries who have physical access to your processor to upload microcode updates. Well, actually, I guess it doesn't require physical access. Sure, we can start defining post-quantum however we want.


[Anna Rose] (41:50 - 41:57)
Just a note, there was... Oh, there. Perfect.


Okay. We have someone coming up who had a question, and then, Nico, you had a question next.


[Sebastien Guillemot] (41:59 - 42:35)
Yeah, I wanted to maybe reframe your question in a way that might get more people in the audience to raise their hand, which is on the complexity theory side of things, which is we don't really actually know if, from a complexity theory point of view, quantum computers are actually better. I mean, we don't really know if P equals NP or not. So from that kind of lens, there's a chance that there is a polynomial time algorithm to solve some of these cryptography questions that we just haven't found yet.


Of course, we don't actually know the constants. But this ties into maybe some greater problems in computer science.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (42:35 - 43:23)
I have an answer. I have opinions. So what we're really doing when we move to post-quantum algorithms is we're getting rid of all of the dependencies on discrete log.


For most systems, that's what we're doing. That works just as well against a classical discrete log algorithm as it does against a quantum computer. I always frame it as we're fixing this protocol against a discrete log-breaking adversary.


We're not specifically protecting it against a quantum computer. Because, as you said, Grover's algorithm is basically irrelevant. You should choose your key sizes long enough, but you should do that because of multi-target attacks, not because of Grover's algorithm.


[Anna Rose] (43:27 - 43:39)
Okay, fine. There's one more switch, I think, and then we're going to wrap up our panel. But there is sort of the timeline question that hasn't really been answered.


Your favourite.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (43:40 - 43:52)
Just very briefly, since you mentioned the risk of the rush to post-quantum, is there also any worry about rushing to lattices when we don't know enough about lattice assumptions? Hash functions, I think we've seen for a long time.


[Dan Boneh] (43:54 - 43:56)
Justin, do you want to take that? No point.


[Patrick Towa] (43:58 - 44:00)
You're dropping a hot potato.


[Justin Drake] (44:02 - 45:38)
I mean, there is also a question in the hash-based world. Should we be rushing to Poseidon? And hopefully we won't be.


We're looking at all the alternatives and we're trying to do as much diligence as possible. On the lattices, I think there's a real question as to whether... We do know that the assumptions are about 30 years old.


A lot of mathematicians have looked at them. But because there hasn't been an incentive to break real-world systems, maybe it's just not battle-tested. On the other hand, the Merkle signatures that we're looking to deploy, the so-called XMSS, where the M stands for Merkle, these are 50 years old.


And they're extremely simple. And I guess one of the comments that Dan made is that the cryptography that we're deploying is more complicated. Well, I'm hoping that it's in some sense less complicated, at least in certain parts.


But yeah, one issue with the lattices is that you have to be an expert in order to set the parameters. And there's also, as Dan mentioned, there's a possibility that we will find a quantum algorithm to break lattices. There's also a possibility...


Exactly, a classical one. So if you want to build a system that is likely to last decades and centuries, I think, just a personal opinion, hash functions are the way to go. Yes.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (45:39 - 45:52)
Yes. Yeah, I mean, you can do hash-based signatures. The...


What was I going to say? Okay, so... I have something to say.


[Anna Rose] (45:52 - 46:24)
Can I... So has anyone worried... So you talked about these quantum algorithms.


Is there more focus... Okay, let me try to frame this. If there is the assumption that quantum is coming, will people focus more on these quantum algorithms instead of the classical ones that could break existing systems?


Like, will we almost get a mind-share problem if everyone starts... Like, if everyone buys into quantum...


[Dan Boneh] (46:24 - 46:28)
Quantum algorithms, they're a superset of classical algorithms.


[Anna Rose] (46:29 - 46:29)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (46:29 - 46:38)
So if you're designing a quantum algorithm by definition, you also... Or rather, if you're designing a classical algorithm, that's also a quantum algorithm.


[Anna Rose] (46:38 - 46:50)
But I'm almost wondering if the mind-share goes too far into quantum and isn't then reusable in this classical sense. This is more like a social question, like...


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (46:50 - 48:35)
I mean, the attention... Sorry, random thought. The attention...


Sorry to interrupt. The attention on post-quantum cryptography, that's how a lot of the isogenies-based systems like Psyche got broken. So...


And they were broken not by a new algorithm, but because people hadn't noticed that there was an existing algorithm that broke them. That's a bit of an oversimplification, and it doesn't apply to all of the isogeny-based schemes, but that's a brief summary. So, yes, there will be more attention on the algorithms that are being used in...


The assumptions that are being used in post-quantum cryptography. That's fine, because lattices... There's actually a lot of dependency on lattices in conventional cryptography, because it kind of...


LOL, the main algorithm used to break lattice problems, is also used in classical cryptanalysis against various things. So, yeah, advances in those algorithms aren't just going to break the post-quantum stuff necessarily. Oh, other thing is hybrids.


So, basically, if you're doing... Did you say hybrid? Yeah.


If you want to upgrade your protocol to post-quantum encryption, say, then you should just use X-Wing, which is a hybrid of MLChem and ECIS, basically.


[Dan Boneh] (48:36 - 49:00)
Which is what is deployed on the web. But, by the way, when Intel said they're going to become post-quantum, they mean they're going to implement MLDSA in their processor. And so, you know, if your processor for security depends on the security of MLDSA, you're kind of lattice-based regardless, whether you want to or not.


So, we're going to have lattices in our lives at any rate.


[Anna Rose] (49:02 - 49:28)
Would it make sense to talk about timeline? The reason I want to talk about the timeline is because you're here, Justin. Because I feel like you're one of the most bullish people.


I know. I kind of quoted you, Dan, today to Justin. I said, you know, Dan says the 2029 date is more coming from the security teams, not from the physicists.


And you disagreed.


[Justin Drake] (49:29 - 50:17)
As Dan mentioned, we've been talking to the physicists recently. And there's been a lot of developments in the last few months. But, yeah, if you rewind the clock to October 2025, I was actually on the bearish side of things.


But what happened in October 2025 is that we organised this post-quantum workshop in Cambridge. And we had this guest invited speaker who happens to be a quantum entrepreneur. And he basically totally shifted the Overton window.


He said, Shor's going to be coming between 2030 and 2032. And everyone in the room was like, ah! And he's had this prediction for 15 years now.


And it basically hasn't changed. He just says, you know, you have this exponential growth. You just, you know, draw the lines and it kind of lands there.


[Dan Boneh] (50:18 - 50:25)
You know, by the way, Kalshi disagrees with that. So the prediction market will give you odds against before 2025.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (50:27 - 50:33)
Dan Bernstein's prediction, which he's also had for 15 years, is consistent with that one.


[Justin Drake] (50:35 - 51:33)
Okay, so where was I? Yes, so back then in 2025, my odds of there being a quantum computer by 2032 was about 1%. I kind of gave him the benefit of the doubt.


It was a possibility. And, you know, in our context, 1% is quite a bit, right? Because we're securing, you know, half a trillion dollars.


But then in February 2026, I got early access to the draft from the Google paper. And here my odds went up dramatically to about 10% by 2032. And then when the paper was published, it was this concurrent publication of the Oratomic paper with neutral atoms.


And I basically spent the last month and a half learning about neutral atoms. I've been obsessed. I've watched all the YouTube videos that you could find.


I've read, you know, a bunch of papers. I've had conversations with like half a dozen experts. And now I believe that by 2032, there's a 50% chance that we'll have a quantum computer.


[Anna Rose] (51:34 - 51:35)
2032.


[Justin Drake] (51:35 - 52:06)
Yes. But the thing is that 50% chance is just way too high. Like, we have to upgrade before then.


And I have this notion of the effective Q day, which is, you know, the working date that we have to have in mind by which, you know, there's a sufficient chance that a quantum computer could arrive. And, you know, roughly speaking, it's, let's say, 10%. And I believe now that there's a 10% chance that in 2030, we'll have a quantum computer.


And therefore, we have to upgrade before then, hence the 2029 timeline.


[Dan Boneh] (52:07 - 53:01)
So that's a security analysis that drives the 2029 number, which I think is exactly also what the Google security team did. Yes. 2029.


Yes. I interpret the 2029 number to say, let's talk about Google, not so much. The Ethereum Foundation is actually on a good path.


But for Google, for them to transition their entire infrastructure to be post-quantum is a crazy hard task. They have to replace a huge number of their hardware devices. And it's a crazy hard task.


It's most likely they will miss their 2029 target. But even if they miss it by three years, you know, we're at 2032, maybe that's, we're still safe. If they stuck to their 2035 number, and they missed that by three years, now we're getting into pretty dangerous territory.


Yeah. So I think this is part of the reason why they decided to set 2029 as a goal. And I think for the Ethereum Foundation, it's a great number too.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (53:02 - 53:28)
There's also the time taken to deploy infrastructure, which as I said before, people always underestimate. So it's not just blockchains that have a potential governance problem that makes upgrades take years. It's PKI, it's HSMs, as we've already mentioned.


So yeah, estimate three years just for people to get their act together.


[Dan Boneh] (53:28 - 54:01)
The thing that I'm a little worried about is the public hears 2029, and they say, oh wow, we're going to have quantum computers in 2029. No, that's not, I don't think that's the message. The message is the upgraded transition has to be done, or at least we should shoot for 2029 so that if we miss, we still have a margin of safety.


It doesn't mean that 2029 is a date when we're going to have a quantum computer. Yeah, and even the, well, okay, fine. Maybe some physicists are aggressive about 2029, but even many of the people we talk to are, you know, they give low odds for 2029.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (54:01 - 54:13)
Will we see signs along the way, or is it going to be a one-shot? Okay, that is a- You know, there's also the famous question of why have we not factored 21? You know, I think there's kind of all- Those are two different questions.


[Dan Boneh] (54:13 - 54:15)
Oh, all right, okay, yes.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (54:15 - 54:16)
Just treat them separately then.


[Dan Boneh] (54:16 - 54:19)
Maybe we should, well, should we talk about 21 or should we talk about are we going to see signs?


[Justin Drake] (54:20 - 54:20)
Go ahead, 21.


[Dan Boneh] (54:23 - 55:32)
So 21 is not an easy problem. So when you write Shor's algorithm for factoring 21, that's about 200 gates, yeah? Today, we can't do 200.


Actually, I guess they said that maybe without replenishing, they can get roughly to 200. Well, you need error-corrected gates, which we don't really have in real time now. Well, that's my point.


I mean, we, okay, so they talk about replenishing, but definitely 200 gates, we have to do error correction. So the first thing is you have to get error correction to work. Error correction only started working in 2024.


So this question of 21 was, like, irrelevant before 2024. Yeah, and now that things are starting to work, 21 is coming within scope. In fact, it's interesting that they were saying they might be able to do it without replenishing, which is still with error correction, but without replenishing, which is interesting.


It's just that that's, like, they're not interested in doing that. Why would they factor 21? That's, like, the question they always ask.


So right now, it's kind of not, it's maybe on the boundary, but within a year or two, the circuits will be big enough to do that, and hopefully one of the teams will actually do that. So that will put that debate to rest.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (55:32 - 55:58)
Yeah, I'm frustrated by these papers that say things like, I can factor this faster using a VIC-20 than using a simulation of this quantum algorithm. It's a silly argument, because the problem is getting error-corrected qubits at all. And then Shor's algorithm is polynomial time, so everything goes very fast after that point.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (55:59 - 56:14)
So will there be signs along the way, or will we suddenly have... Do you want to say it to the mic? Oh, sure.


So will there be signs along the way, or will we suddenly have error correction factoring way bigger numbers than 21 and breaking all our cryptography?


[Justin Drake] (56:16 - 56:20)
I'm not the person to answer this. But from what I can tell, it's now just engineering.


[Dan Boneh] (56:23 - 57:34)
So, you know, I used to use this Moore's law model to try and predict when... The reason I used to say 2040 is you do a Moore's law calculation, and you kind of get 2040. And after talking to the physicists again and again, they all seem to be of the opinion that Moore's law is the wrong model here.


This stuff doesn't evolve linearly, but it evolves in jumps. It's like human flight, right? There was one day where humans couldn't fly, and the next day humans could fly.


So this stuff evolves in jumps, and as a result, Moore's law is actually not a good model. So predicting has now become very difficult. And then will we see...


You're asking also, will we see progress? That actually is a very touchy topic. Let's just say the fact that the Google paper had a zero-knowledge proof in it rather than the actual circuits suggests, and they're very clear about that, that there might not be as much transparency going forward as we have seen in the past.


So it could be that... I don't mean to... I don't know.


I'm not sure how to say it. I'll say it anyhow.


[Justin Drake] (57:34 - 57:34)
Say it.


[Dan Boneh] (57:35 - 57:43)
That's what they're telling us, basically. It could be that five years go by where we don't hear of any progress, but that doesn't mean that progress isn't being made.


[Justin Drake] (57:44 - 57:47)
And even when we do hear progress, that progress could be stale.


[Anna Rose] (57:50 - 58:22)
Well, on that note... This is... Actually, I've been getting signs for the last 15 minutes, but I have five minutes each time.


So I think it is probably a good moment to wrap up. We also brought you back onto the panel, so it was a full circle. I want to say thank you to all of the panellists, spontaneous panellists for joining us.


I want to say thank you to this entire audience. Thank you for coming to zkSummit and joining us for another edition. Yeah, thanks so much.


[Daira-Emma Hopwood] (58:24 - 58:24)
Oh, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (58:27 - 58:48)
And we're not quite done yet. We actually, sort of spontaneously as well, decided to grab a few drinks at the bar - on us. So there is a tab.


Please enjoy a few drinks in the lobby, and we'll get a chance to continue our conversations. Till next time.