[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 1:58)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Nico and I are joined by Shyam and Emanuele, co-founders of provably. We explore the concept of verifiable databases. That is, the tools needed to prove something about an underlying database without exposing the underlying data.


The conversation covers how it works under the hood, as well as real-world use cases where proving the correctness of SQL databases unlocks new possibilities. We then look ahead at emerging applications, such as in multi-agent AI systems and in on-chain data markets. Before we kick off, three quick points.


First, zkSummit is coming back with its 14th edition. Applications to attend are still open. It will be on May 7th in Rome.


Links are in the show notes, and hope to see you there. Second, zkMesh+, our paid subscription tier, is rolling. We've released a few bonus clips over there, as well as some of our exclusive research reports.


If you want to get access and support the show, please join the paid tier. Third, if you're looking for other ways to support the show, we have donation accounts visible in the footer of our website. Support definitely goes a long way, so if you decide to support us, thank you in advance.


That's all for now. Links are in the show notes. Now, here is our episode on verifiable databases with Shyam and Emanuele.


Today, Nico and I are here with Shyam and Emanuele from Provably. Welcome to the show.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (1:58 - 2:01)
Thanks for having us. Hey, thank you for having us. Good to see you.


[Anna Rose] (2:01 - 2:03)
Hi, Nico. How are you doing?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:03 - 2:05)
I'm good. How are you doing?


[Anna Rose] (2:05 - 2:09)
Good. This is the first time recording after your six-part series on Lean Ethereum.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:10 - 2:12)
It is. Yeah, we're back to regular scheduling.


[Anna Rose] (2:13 - 2:26)
This episode was a suggestion of yours. The team at Provably are building something called verifiable databases. Before we kick it off, I actually wanted to ask you something.


Have we seen this before in any of our interviews?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:27 - 2:45)
Ish. We mentioned it in an episode with Pratyush. And I think in that episode, I said, oh, there's this team provably, they're also building verifiable databases.


And I've been in touch with the provably guys for a while, I've been advising them for a bit. So this also acts as a disclaimer in a way. So that's why I thought it would be super nice to have them on the show as well.


[Anna Rose] (2:45 - 2:56)
Very cool. So yeah, welcome, Shyam and Emanuele. Let's learn a little bit about both of you and potentially the founding or yeah, sort of how you got to work on provably.


Shyam, let's start with you.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (2:57 - 4:46)
Yeah, my story is I was at IBM for 15 years in the UK, building non-crypto stuff, just working on physical products from Formula One cars, submarines, aeroplanes, etc. Bringing physical things to life, basically. At the time, nothing was connected.


They were just simple standalone entities. But in the last five years of my time there, I started to work on data ecosystems. And particularly, I was chief architect of a big electric vehicle programme that was also becoming semi-autonomous.


That's when I met Emanuele also. The interesting thing that was happening there was as these devices were becoming connected, there was this whole question of what type of data ecosystem would they exist in in the future and future specifically like going out to 2030. Now, if you think about data ecosystems, and if you take a normal brand, they would put themselves at the centre, right?


So they will write, I don't know, Pepsi, Coca-Cola, Tesla, we're in the centre, and everyone is all around us. And that's how it was that we would be in the middle and all our systems that we make, Coca-Cola, IoT devices that we'd make, we'll be able to talk to each other. But what they realised on the research side, and then also then communicated to myself on the IBM side was actually the future is going to be that these unknown autonomous systems are going to coexist with other autonomous systems, and they don't know anything about each other.


We can start off in a world where the brands know each other, but over time, you actually want something where you have distributed integrity. And that was kind of like the background question of how can we prepare for a world like that? And I reached out to Manuel, who was at IBM Research, and then we've been collaborating ever since and provably is more recent, but that was kind of the backstory of how we met.


[Anna Rose] (4:46 - 4:49)
Nice. Did you leave the company or are you still connected to it?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (4:50 - 5:16)
No, I left IBM. We both did work for a couple of other startups in between IBM and provably wasn't like the immediate idea. But what became apparent was that it reached a point where we had to go out and build it, build this thing of verifiable data, verifiable data exchange, verifiable data collaboration.


And yeah, we did a few other things and then we thought, OK, this is now time to put it all together. And that's what we do.


[Anna Rose] (5:17 - 5:19)
Emanuele, tell us a little bit about you.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (5:20 - 5:33)
Well, I am a much more technologist as a background. So I did the usual path, meaning I went to university, did a PhD, worked for a couple of industrial R&Ds.


[Anna Rose] (5:33 - 5:36)
Did you do it in CS or in math or something?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (5:36 - 6:30)
No, maths. I'm a mathematician by training. But curiously enough, my maths background at the beginning was what is called the functional analysis and the partial differential equations.


And that's why I got into IBM research, actually, because basically we were putting together supercomputers with a big system of equations to predict the weather or, you know, very complex phenomena. It came in 2016 and I just stumbled upon Bitcoin and the first Satoshi paper and cryptography was always there as a side hobby, etc. And so I got into it.


I got permission to start a group, met Shyam. We started to talk about the ecosystem. At the time we were doing Hyperledger Fabric, I don't know if you guys, yeah, so I was part of that team.


[Anna Rose] (6:30 - 6:32)
Is this era 2017, 2018?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (6:33 - 6:35)
That is correct. Yes. It was very hot at the time.


[Anna Rose] (6:36 - 6:36)
I remember.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (6:39 - 8:23)
So I met Shyam. We collaborated a bit. We had clients together, etc.


We started to build, I think I built one of the first peer to peer trading systems using blockchain for IBM at the time, not globally. We actually called it Agora at the time. And then Shyam and myself, we got offers from another startup, moved there, then tried something else together as well.


Some of those experiences were a bit traumatic. 


[Anna Rose] Startup life. 


[Emanuele Ragnoli] Startup life. Yes. And then it was a sort of coincidence, basically, in around 2023, basically. We always wanted to do verifiable databases, etc.


And at the time we stumbled upon a blog by Matteo Campanelli, it was called Tavloid. And basically, he started to describe how to basically build the verification and the proving around the tabular structures and certain types of protocols actually had become much more robust as well and much more performant. And so we thought it's the time.


It's the right time. And we launched provably. And we were not alone.


So we were together with Alberto, Simona and others that have been our co-founders since. And we basically matched together a different set of skills around the databases, cryptography, vision with Shyam, etc., etc. So we came to exist around April 2024.


[Anna Rose] (8:24 - 8:24)
Cool.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (8:25 - 8:28)
So in Paris Blockchain Week, Anna, you were there.


[Anna Rose] (8:29 - 8:35)
You mean like ECC? ECC. Yeah.


There is a Paris Blockchain Week or there was, I don't know if it's still around.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (8:35 - 9:20)
And then it was the Modular Summit. It was Modular Summit. Yeah.


So I went there. That was when this whole new chapter was beginning. I was there.


I saw Nico. And then I just kind of mentioned it to him. We didn't know each other.


We just happened to bump into each other. Then I said, we're thinking about this thing. And the first version of what we worked on for one year till the end of 2024 was verifiable analytics and how do you do queries on private data and prove that they performed correctly and completely.


Now we've gone on and we can go on to talk about what we're doing now. But that was like the first version of provably and exploring if there was an interest out there and should we start building it. And I think at the end of that conference, I met a lot of people who said, this is a good idea.


You should do it. And then, yeah, we started.


[Anna Rose] (9:20 - 9:23)
This was the Modular Summit 2023?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (9:23 - 9:24)
Yes. In Paris. Yeah.


Cool.


[Anna Rose] (9:25 - 9:34)
Okay. So I want to obviously dig into the verifiable, provable databases. But what happened to the ZK for analytics?


Why did you move away from that?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (9:34 - 9:43)
We didn't really move away from that. The first iteration of the protocol that we call a verifiable analytic used the bullet proof.


[Anna Rose] (9:43 - 9:44)
Okay.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (9:44 - 11:44)
For example, And there were clear limitations, like we had the issues with proof sizes, we had issues with performance. Also, it has to be noticed that when we talk about, you know, this first phase that we call verifiable analytics, it was also, let's call it a commercial use case phase.


So we were looking for, let's say, for, I mean, a very specific type of web to customers all centered around basically business intelligence and et cetera, et cetera. And it was a bit hard. It was also a bit hard because the performances of the system at the time were not really matching what the clients wanted.


So the system was working and et cetera, but like any first system, it was a bit clunky, not properly performant, et cetera. And there were also parts that had not been, let's call it created yet. Okay.


So for example, when you deal with SQL databases and you have to perform linear operations, it was a little bit tough to do that with the bullet proof and those kind of proofs. So in the meantime, again, Campanelli published the linear vector commitment maps. And that was like a kind of eureka moment, because again, that improved performance, security and et cetera.


And in fact, Matteo is, he's not officially a part of probably et cetera. He has been with us. I mean, you can see him in the, in the e-prints, the papers and et cetera.


He's, he has, he's, he has his fingers in the protocol, et cetera. So basically we call that a verifiable analytics phase because of a combination of use cases and the protocol that we built. And we moved away from there and we got much nearer to SQL algebra, if you want to call it that.


[Anna Rose] (11:44 - 11:45)
I see.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (11:45 - 11:59)
From a computer science point of view, basically we got as a protocol very near to what they are called the data structures that you use to represent data and SQL queries.


[Anna Rose] (11:59 - 12:26)
One of my first questions on this topic is just like, what are verifiable databases? Because I sort of, when I heard it, I thought like, does this replace something like SQL? Does it take the same role in like building an application?


Or are you talking about like database at a different part of the stack? These are the things that were on my mind. So maybe just kind of going from what you just described, define what a verifiable database is for us.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (12:26 - 13:24)
The answer is no, we don't replace SQL. Okay. Okay.


SQL as an engine for a database remains the same. So what is a verifiable database? A verifiable database is a database where the data owner has the feature of keeping his data confidential.


So he does not expose the data to a user that needs to do SQL queries. And a user that does SQL queries basically gets back the result of the query with a proof. A proof that says the query was done on the data inside that DB that were supposed to be used as input for that query.


So there is no cheating on that side. And also the result of the query is correct. Okay.


The function, the select aggregation, the filter, etc. has been computed correctly.


[Anna Rose] (13:24 - 13:44)
So you're not rebuilding the concept of databases and you're not like hosting them and you're not like, I guess when I heard verifiable databases, I sort of thought of like a full kind of you would replace just any database tooling and now it would be verifiable. But instead what you're saying is this is like an add on to existing. It's a middleware.


A middleware. Okay.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (13:44 - 14:28)
Exactly. Okay. So the database, let's say you have an existing database.


You can use provably as a middleware to connect it to that database, commit that data, and then all the queries that you run on it from there on, you can prove its correctness and completeness. And the big advantage here compared to, let's say, previous attempts is that there's no data migration. So you have a lot of data already or you have some existing solution.


It's just APIs and then in minutes you're good to go. And then on the SQL side, the users just, or the app on the other side is just running SQL queries, plain SQL queries. So there's nothing for them to know other than the result will now come with a proof, which proves the integrity of that data.


[Anna Rose] (14:28 - 14:41)
You mentioned sort of in your history that you were kind of working on blockchain, like this verifiable part, is there some immutable part of this or can this be used with all types of databases? Like basically, does this still live in the blockchain world or not?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (14:41 - 16:33)
No. So we need relational databases. Okay.


So you need the row columns schema. Okay. So typically the transactional nature of a blockchain is not set up in that way.


So it's transaction blocks, etc. So we don't apply ourselves directly to a blockchain, for example, but we work really well, for example, with indexes. When a blockchain is indexed and you index that in a DB, where you can also put other metadata, etc, etc, and you make it relational, that is a very good application for us.


In fact, we have been discussing that with a couple of blockchain projects and the wallets as well. Those are some of our potential customers. Now, when a blockchain becomes important as a tool in our stack, is that because a data owner or probably itself, the system, eventually there is the need, again, depending on the use case, to post these proofs, the commitment of the SQL query, because you want to verify them and you want to verify them also at different times, not only immediately, etc.


So a blockchain becomes a natural storage place where the pro-value proofs are posted. In fact, on this side, for example, we have been working a lot with Midnight, the privacy blockchain out of Cardano. We are one of their ecosystem partners and the dApp that we are building for them, for us, is going to be released when the mainnet comes out.


Actually, we'll have this feature, basically, connected probably to Midnight and the proofs then are posted on the Midnight ledger.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (16:34 - 16:48)
I guess you were saying also, you get a proof that my query is run on the database. So I guess I need some kind of notion of a commitment to the database to exist somewhere. And I guess a blockchain is also a good place to go and put that or update that maybe.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (16:48 - 17:14)
Absolutely. The way in which we do now for, say, non-blockchain clients is that basically we use, for example, transparent logs, databases or a database where the data owner access the proofs and then distributes them around. But eventually, yes, an immutable place is actually the desirable space where you want to post these artefacts.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (17:14 - 17:41)
So in our blockchain-y world, we're used to storing data and committing to it in Merkle trees. And then when someone wants access to that data, we say like, hey, here's the opening. Here's the proof that it was in my Merkle tree.


You know, you're happy with that. I think some teams have been also doing some processing on top of these things. And that's, you know, the coprocessors of a few years ago.


Is that sort of the same thing or completely different?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (17:41 - 19:39)
No, it's different in this sense. Now, the notion of verifiable databases, we did not invent it. It already existed.


There were already a few prototypes, products around. One of them actually uses this approach that you mentioned, so the Merkle tree approach. And it works.


I mean, nothing and it's adopted. The issue becomes when you try to put a lot of data in the Merkle tree. And that's how we were born.


So as verifiable DBs, we wanted to enable big data, a lot of data, a lot of rows, columns, etc., etc. Now, the way in which a Merkle database tree or basically a verifiable DB based on Merkle tree works is that every time that you run a query, the Merkle tree needs to verify all these data paths, etc., etc. And this is extremely costly when the data grow exponentially.


We don't do that. We go through polynomial commitments. That is what I was mentioning when I was saying we are much more near the algebra of the data.


We are much more near the algebra of the query. And that is basically SQL, basic SQL are algebraic queries. And that they are very prone to be represented by polynomials and vector commitments.


And so we do that. And in this way, our dependencies are on the complexity on the query. The data themselves being one megabyte, one terabyte, one petabyte, for example, that dimension does not really impact probably.


It's the complexity of the query that does. So with Merkle DBs, you know, you are dependent on the database size. With us, you're not.


[Anna Rose] (19:40 - 19:45)
It's more about the complexity of the query. Is there any sort of size blow up for you guys in that case?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (19:46 - 20:55)
Not a size blow up, but more like, for example, it's very hard for us, in fairness, to represent what they are called recursive queries. So there is a point in which SQL from becoming basic relational SQL can become recursive and it becomes Turing complete. So let's take, for example, an exponential.


For us, it's hard to process an exponential because it becomes an SQL query that is extremely complex, recursive etc. For a zero-knowledge VM instead, you know, because how they are done, representing an exponential is somehow easier. So from a certain point of view, we are a very specialised machine that performs really well on basic relational SQL.


And why did we do that? Because basically that's, say, 80 percent of the workload that exists in verifiable operations and the use cases.


[Anna Rose] (20:55 - 21:03)
OK, so in that example, are ZKVMs using basic relational databases or? Yeah, maybe I'm mixing it up.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (21:04 - 21:36)
No, so a ZKVM is a generalistic approach. OK. It's a computing machine that you use to do zero-knowledge, to verify some type of computation.


And they are generalistic, so they can compute upon performance costs any type of function. We focus on SQL, so simple algebra. OK, so when it comes to simple algebra and simple SQL relationships, a ZKVM is an overkill.


[Anna Rose] (21:36 - 21:45)
OK, I see. So the ZKVM is overkill in this case. And so are you kind of then doing a similar activity to what a ZKVM would be doing?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (21:45 - 21:48)
No, because we are very specialistic.


[Anna Rose] (21:49 - 21:57)
But when you say it's overkill, it almost sounds like is it just kind of you're saying it's more generalistic? Are you doing sort of a narrow version of what a ZKVM could do?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (21:57 - 22:14)
Somehow. OK. Meaning we focus again on linear algebra, while a ZKVM can do non-linear stuff.


OK. But when you try to do linear algebra, our performance and our simplicity is much better.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (22:15 - 23:07)
Maybe we should talk about the performance part, because there are limitations on how so if you take ZKVM, the size of the data and queries matter in terms of there's a threshold on how big the data and the queries and the complexity of the query can be. So an example could be if you ran an SQL query on a million rows in a database, in a ZKVM, there's a certain user experience. You've got to write that query.


You've got to turn it into a circuit or you've got to compile it. And then when you run that query, there's a certain performance. Whilst if you do it using this approach on verifiable databases, there's nothing to compile.


You just write your SQL query and it's ready to go and compute the proof and give you the answer straight away. So it's great for like ad hoc queries because it's already there and you can produce proofs faster on bigger data.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (23:07 - 23:21)
Since we are comparing to ZKVMs, the other end of the spectrum is a circuit. You know, that's how people would go and write specialised applications. They go and they write a circuit.


Is that what you guys are doing? Like you have a special SQL circuit or something completely different?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (23:21 - 23:25)
No, no, no, no. Because we use commitments. Nico knows the answer here.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (23:26 - 23:29)
It's an interesting answer. That's why I want to pull it out from them.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (23:29 - 24:06)
No, no, no. Because otherwise you would have to write a circuit for every data, a circuit for every query, etc., etc., etc. We didn't want to do that.


So we wrote a protocol that is non-generalist. It's not a general framework. We do not use a circuit.


We use a case AG that is, let's call it one of the Swiss knives of, you know, polymonomial commitment cryptography, vector commitments and linear vector commitment maps and zero testing for proving linear relationships on the data.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (24:07 - 24:19)
For our resident cryptographers, we have case AG, but we don't have a SNARK for all circuits like you'd have with PLUNK. This is actually like a polynomial IOP specifically for SQL. Is that correct?


That is correct, yes. Nice.


[Anna Rose] (24:19 - 24:36)
I was wondering if you could share a bit more on how this would actually be used in practice and a bit of a user flow. You talked about it being used to prove things about a database, but who is doing that? When are they doing that?


Why are they doing that?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (24:37 - 26:32)
So very generally speaking, let's say, and maybe I can start off with the blockchain world and then talk about something that we're already doing outside of a blockchain. But a typical example in a blockchain world is, let's say there's some private transactions and that data is primarily on-chain and then the user knows about it because it's in their wallet. Now it's very hard for that user to prove facts about that data to someone else externally.


So let's say I'm an institution, I've done a lot of transactions on-chain in some private database. Now I need to prove that yesterday I earned X amount of income and these were my expenses and this is my profit. A simple thing like that, if you had a verifiable database, if you had that, all your private transactions, verifiably indexed into your local state, into your wallet, now you just write one line of SQL and you can prove that this was my business's total turnover yesterday, total income, total expenses, all of this type of stuff.


So that's an example where I think the way we are seeing the world is we are creating an awful lot of verifiable data when those transactions happen. It's just that afterwards we don't use it because we usually have to index the data out and then you create your dashboards and you prove performance and all these things. When actually what a verifiable database allows you to do is kind of like extend that chain of trust.


Now everything else that you want to prove about your on-chain data, for example, you can just do that using SQL queries. So that's like one example in the blockchain world and off-chain there is beginning to be a need in, let's say you can call it Web2 or emerging autonomous systems where traditional databases want to prove that the data that they have is authentic and anything that they say about their data is correct and complete. So this is the other space that we're focused on and very excited about because this is like everything else.


[Anna Rose] (26:32 - 27:03)
Yeah, yeah. I mean, in this case, I'm getting slightly echoes of the ZKID state where it's like you have the ability to prove certain things without revealing everything. If you're dealing with a private database, would you be using these kinds of proofs of querying in order to sort of protect other parts of the database?


Like you could keep parts of it private because you just need to prove these little bits of it? Or do you think of this as you would do, you'd actually verify everything for the dashboard or for another use case?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (27:03 - 27:50)
The umbrella is a kind of distributed systems integrity, meaning even if the data was public, you could prove that I'm answering to you correctly. So let's say there's an awful lot of transactions. There's like a million rows.


Now, the user journey of someone independently downloading that million rows and then computing it versus me just giving you a proof of this is the sum of all of those things on a million rows. That's an example where just giving a proof is faster than somebody else downloading it and doing it. So there are those use cases as well where it's about public data.


An example that we've had a lot of discussions about is, and it's usually people that are operating blockchain nodes, is how can they know as fast as possible the state of a blockchain node?


[Anna Rose] (27:50 - 27:53)
But weren't the indexing projects supposed to help that?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (27:54 - 28:04)
Yeah, well, they're kind of. So if I, having listened to the podcasts of the past, these things have come up. I think Lagrange, for example, is one.


[Anna Rose] (28:04 - 28:08)
Or longer ago, like the graph and stuff was indexing.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (28:08 - 28:15)
Yes. So I think there's a lot of examples where there's been data integrity, but not necessarily query integrity.


[Anna Rose] (28:15 - 28:16)
OK.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (28:16 - 28:54)
So you can prove that you've indexed everything over. But now let's say I need to report on that index. How do I prove to you I didn't leave certain data out?


All right. And how do I prove to you that I did the maths right? That here's my sum or here's my count or here's my average.


Here's the minimum, maximum, all of these things. That's where. So I think there's a lot of work in the past and around data integrity, but the query integrity is what the user wants in the end.


So if I'm reporting to you my business's total earnings last month out of a given wallet, for example, then that's like, you know, showing all my income minus my expenses, for example.


[Anna Rose] (28:54 - 28:54)
Yeah, yeah.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (28:54 - 29:00)
Right. So we could have a block explorer that also tells me I ran your query correctly and this is the answer. Exactly.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (29:00 - 30:08)
So that would be a great bolt onto a public index. And then you could also imagine doing this now that, you know, 2026 is the year of privacy. You can imagine that a user may want to prove facts about their private state.


And then for them, if you've got a verifiable index, now you can hide certain things. You may not want to show who your customers are, your source of income, but you can prove the state of that private database. And this really, so examples where we're hearing the need, like the other side, the demand side is, I think we're starting to see it around, let's say in vaults, where there is a, we're slowly going towards like on-chain credit cards.


Now, if you want to do lending on-chain and you don't want the user to over collateralise and bring their assets, now you need to know something about them, right? So they're not going to bring assets. Now you're going to give them a loan based on some information you have about them.


So they need to prove to you their average income, their savings, right? And then this takes us towards basically you can do credit scoring. And all of this credit scoring is based on immutable data that they're slowly doing more and more via stablecoins on-chain.


[Anna Rose] (30:08 - 30:16)
It does have to be on-chain though for this to work. It's not like you're going sort of to like a bank statement online or something.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (30:16 - 31:12)
You can. I think the opportunity, from a go-to-market perspective is on the TradFi side, this infrastructure exists with all its problems. It kind of exists.


But as stablecoin transactions kind of enter, there's this convergence of, you're kind of building verifiable data and verifiable history. Wow. That's the bit that is open to be exploited.


And if you listen to more, for example, they talk about, we don't yet have private vault, private data oracles. So if I'm a single user and I want to borrow on-chain, how do I prove that to you, you know, to get better rates? And that's an example of a private oracle where this would fit really, really well.


I think we're still like a year early from that type of use case because now the vaults are just focused on onboarding and growing and that side. But I think if you fast forward out, they will have the money and then you'll have all these on-chain transactions that are in some private wallet. And then you can see the two kinds of converging.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (31:12 - 31:50)
By the way, linking to the TradFi thing, there is a world where banks will sign our bank statements or we can use TLS attestations to prove statements about a bank's bank statements. We build up a private index at home and then you can go and issue proofs about your private index of like, okay, I have statements for the past five years with no interruption. They're all in my name.


All these good events happened. None of these bad events happened. Like you can do these kinds of things, which would be quite hard without an index, like to go and prove that you did not, I don't know, spend more than X amount of dollars on a single thing.


It's hard to do. Like, how do I know that you use all your data to prove that to me?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (31:51 - 32:45)
So in the episode you had with Sean Bowie, he spoke about this layer in between the chain and the wallet, right? Because at the moment Zcash is tied to specific wallets on the rich client side. And we don't know what the answer is there, but they're working on something.


And I'm guessing that there's this intermediate layer where there is a verifiable index on which different wallets can tap into and from which Zcash transactions can be used in DeFi in this way, where I can prove things about private state. And the other thing that's very interesting that this is like, just like loose stock almost, play stock, you can call it, is we are kind of observing that in the last six months you've seen with OpenClaw and stuff, that it seems that we're all going to get this one extra device. It's going to be always on.


It's going to have GPUs. It's going to be always connected where you could run your proofs, which in the case of OpenClaw is like a MacBook Mini.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (32:47 - 32:48)
Yeah.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (32:48 - 33:16)
So that's, we haven't done anything there, but it's just interesting that that's like this new layer that is not on cloud. It's actually with the user. Yeah, it's local.


And it's always on, always connected where you can run workloads. That's very interesting from a ZK perspective, because all the constraints of client-side proving kind of, it's less of a pressure now because you have a sovereign device that has your verifiable index data that you can prove things of.


[Anna Rose] (33:17 - 33:43)
I mean, there's a lot of different use cases that you just shared here. I'm kind of still trying to figure out maybe with one of them, can you tell me where the proofs are generated and like who's generating them and where do they go? Would it be like an application would offer this, like would a wallet offer this to its users that they could back it up or create this verified version or is it automatically happening and where is it living and who's doing the proofs?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (33:44 - 34:02)
So at the moment with one of our clients, for example, the proofs are done by us. Basically, you have a probably server that runs the prover and then stores the proofs in a transparent logs database.


[Anna Rose] (34:02 - 34:06)
OK, and you're seeing it too. So there's no privacy there, I guess, if you're doing it.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (34:06 - 34:40)
Yeah, because, you know, we manage the system basically. That is enough for our current client and for the requirements. Mm hmm.


Eventually, you want the data owner itself to run a prover or probably server middleware and then ship or post the proofs somewhere that is easily accessible by the user and where the user then can just invoke the verifier and get a ticked box.


[Anna Rose] (34:40 - 34:44)
Yeah, get some certification that X has been proved.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (34:44 - 35:17)
So at the moment, basically, our first product that we call probably does all of this. So you log in with a user account, you can set up your DB, you share the schema of the DB, you either put your data in there or you attach the API of your database, et cetera, et cetera. But that is our product.


I mean, that's provably. Then eventually we can offer the middleware as a service or in a C2, et cetera, et cetera.


[Anna Rose] (35:17 - 35:31)
If this was to go then onto the client's device, onto the user's device, then I'm assuming this has to be really efficient. Yeah. What kind of proof size, what kind of machinery would you even need to do this?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (35:32 - 35:49)
So our proof sizes are very small. We said that before. So they are independent on the data size.


So you can have a one terabyte database or a 10 kilobyte one, et cetera, et cetera. It doesn't matter. What matters is the complexity of the query.


[Anna Rose] (35:49 - 35:50)
OK.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (35:50 - 37:07)
And typically for basic relational SQL, our proof size never goes higher than one kilobyte, 1.5. And that's really small. Yeah. Also, our verifier time and verifier complexity and requirement for running the verifier, it's extremely small.


So you could run it on a mobile phone or whatever, even on an IoT device, for example. And we are really talking to verifier proof in just one, two, three, maximum 10 milliseconds. The prover is a little bit bigger.


And again, because the prover actually has to check the data, et cetera, et cetera. So that's better that it's run, for example, by the data owner in, let's call it a more complex machine. But we are not talking again about the GPU farms or computer cluster, et cetera.


A laptop is enough. So, for example, we get really amazing times just by running on some small virtual machines that we have on the Google Cloud. So we never really had the need to optimize with the GPUs or computer clusters until now.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:07 - 37:13)
Just to be clear, does the prover depend on the table size? I'm guessing the prover at least needs to run the query.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (37:13 - 37:51)
The answer is no, directly. Wow. It doesn't.


Because it depends on the data that are fetched from the query. So it's not the entire dataset per se that influences the prover. It's the data that are included inside the query for computing the query.


So again, it's like the proof size. So there is a dependency, linear, on the complexity of the query. So if you call the complexity of the query Q, so the prover complexity analysis is an O of Q.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:52 - 37:52)
Okay.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (37:53 - 38:03)
Remember before we talked about the Merkle DBs? For a Merkle DB, it's an O of N. So the number of data that are in the DB.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:03 - 38:05)
Okay. So Q is smaller than N, right?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (38:06 - 38:11)
Again, yes. Unless, you know, you want to compute, I don't know, one of the…


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:11 - 38:12)
Something on the whole database.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (38:12 - 38:25)
Well, not only that. I mean, maybe you are crazy and you decide to compute with SQL, I don't know, fluid dynamic equation on the entire Pacific. I don't know.


That would put us in trouble. Yes.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:25 - 38:39)
Okay. So in a way that's a bit reminiscent of lookup arguments, where we got to a point where the prover does a one-time sort of setup that depends on the time of the table. And then lookups only depend on the size of the thing I'm looking up.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (38:39 - 39:07)
Yes, that is correct. In fact, the lookup is actually one of the technologies that we look into eventually, how do you say, having further improvements in the protocol. There has been in the last two years, some very nice results at the intersection between lookup and the ZKs, et cetera.


But at the moment, we are pretty good. So this is really, call it research directions rather than production directions.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (39:08 - 39:25)
So we mentioned lookups. I'm curious to pick this thing apart a bit. We've already mentioned like, okay, you are doing a succinct proof, but not for all circuits.


You're doing a succinct proof specifically for queries. What does that look like? Do we have the same insights as we'd have in Plonk, for example?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (39:26 - 40:07)
No, because we committed the structures of the rows and the columns via polynomial and vector commitments. And then we run the predicates aggregators with linear vector commitment maps, and especially using what is called the inner product. So, you know, we basically can express the SQL predicate queries, et cetera, by using what is called inner product arguments.


And so we don't need the algebraic machinery that is in Plonk, et cetera, et cetera.


[Anna Rose] (40:07 - 40:17)
Is it a totally custom system then? Because you said before you tried Bulletproofs, I'm assuming you moved away from that. Is it based on anything that we're familiar with?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (40:17 - 41:15)
Well, it's based on KSAG. It has been around for a long time. Linear vector commitment maps were published as well by Campanelli a couple of years ago.


They have also been around as an open source code base for some time. So we did not invent new primitives. We have just composed well-known stuff that is pretty secure.


It's also one of the advantages that we have or features is that our protocol is not overly complicated. It's three primitives composed in different ways. So it's also, I know, Nico, you are a security auditor, so we are quite easy to be audited from this point of view.


Our code base is not, you know, the code base of Jolt, for example. OK.


[Anna Rose] (41:17 - 41:26)
But is it like, because I'm trying to figure out, is this like a ZK system or are you just using parts and pieces and techniques that are often used in ZK for something else?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (41:27 - 41:56)
No, this is quite interesting. OK. Technically, if you ask, you know, a hardcore ZK cryptographer, we are not a ZK.


OK. We are not a ZK simply because when you do a query and you know the query, even if it is verifiable on private data, et cetera, you can build some inference, some side channelling, et cetera, et cetera. So we are not a pure ZK.


[Anna Rose] (41:57 - 42:04)
So you're saying you're not ZK in the privacy sense. Correct. You're not zero knowledge.


Maybe the question I'm actually asking is like, is it a SNARK?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (42:04 - 42:06)
Oh, that's a great question, actually. No.


[Anna Rose] (42:06 - 42:08)
It's not a SNARK either. OK, good.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (42:08 - 42:18)
It's not a SNARK. A great question, because in a way you're doing succinct proofs, right? It is succinct.


They are succinct, yes. It is not interactive. It is not interactive, yes.


And it is an argument.


[Anna Rose] (42:19 - 42:23)
It's all the pieces of a SNARK, but not the way we define them, I guess.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (42:23 - 42:41)
But no, the problem is we've been saying the word SNARK specifically for like proofs for circuits. OK. And in that sense, what you guys are doing is not that kind of SNARK.


It's a SNARK for custom things. And right now, we've forgotten that SNARKs could be for something other than circuits.


[Anna Rose] (42:42 - 42:43)
And so we don't have a word for it. That is correct. Wild.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (42:44 - 42:50)
It is, yeah. Like, I think it would be very interesting, like, how do we call these systems that are like custom SNARKs?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (42:50 - 42:57)
That's correct. Well, you know, we don't typically care too much about the labelling put in this way.


[Anna Rose] (42:57 - 43:06)
Oh, but you should. The labels matter. It's the marketing of this scene, I think, is the naming of the protocol in a way.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (43:06 - 43:22)
So actually, the ePrint that you guys have put out is called QEDB. Is that the specific construction? Is that a set of things?


We've been talking about verifiable databases. I see you guys abbreviate it as VDB. Like, what are all these things?


And are these potential names for what this thing is?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (43:22 - 44:24)
We haven't named the baby and whether this is a specific direction for the future. Right. So this is kind of actually what we're all exploring.


Is this a new direction for ZK? And it seems that on one side, you have ZK VMs that can prove the integrity of or prove that an application ran correctly and properly. Right.


And it's creating transactions. And what we are coming to the other side to say, now you can do queries on all those transactions and you can prove the correctness of that. So in a very simple sense, you have a computer that generates data.


And now what we're doing is the other side of all this data that you've created, you can ask questions on it and you can prove it correctly. We should take the time to name this baby and say we are solving a big useful part. Because if you think about, you know, leaving ZK for a second, if you look inside the EVM world, doing data queries on chains is very problematic.


Like you have to write a lot of code. You have to go fetch the code. You have to put it all into a certain structure.


And then you have to compute it.


[Anna Rose] (44:25 - 44:25)
You have to run it.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (44:25 - 45:16)
Yeah. And then you have to run it. And this is like, there's a lot of complexity and overhead there and performance issues.


We've just taken all of that away. And therefore, I think it is kind of a big deal. And we should take the time to name it.


And I think the future requirements, why this isn't like a one-off is we're just going to get more and more data. This is obviously an inevitability, more and more verifiable data, because just more and more things are going to be on chain. And the need for going from just doing payments and transactions to actually making sense of the data will only grow.


That's never, it's not like going to die away. It's actually just starting. You know, the last decade we can do private payments, private transactions.


And now people's entire financial lives are in there. Heading there.


[Anna Rose] (45:17 - 45:17)
Yeah.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (45:17 - 45:23)
Yeah. So like as Nico gave the example that if I've got five years of some transactions, how do I prove that?


[Anna Rose] (45:23 - 45:56)
Wow. Yeah. I mean, this does bring up the concept of ZK.


I mean, you actually haven't said ZK databases. You've said provably verified, like you're using the succinct words more, the succinctness words, the fact that you're proving something about it instead of the private part. Is there going to be a private part, though?


Does it make sense for what you're doing to have? Like you're running things on privacy, on private databases potentially, but you yourselves don't need to be private, do you? I mean, if you're client side, it's with the client, but it's not private per se.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (45:56 - 46:20)
Actually, maybe Anna, I can jump in quickly in that there is privacy, if I understand correctly, on the original commitment. Like when you commit to your database that is private, the commitment doesn't reveal anything. Now, when you allow people to do queries on your database, you're already opening yourself up to like, OK, come and learn things about my data.


And I think you were talking about that earlier, Emanuele, when you said we're not ZK per se.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (46:20 - 46:21)
Yes, yes, yes. OK.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (46:21 - 46:25)
Do you have control on what people can ask about your data and what they cannot ask?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (46:25 - 47:04)
Absolutely. This is a normal database management feature because we did not create a new database. But you, as a user, come in with your DB, your DB structure, your DB management systems.


You are able, as a data owner, to continue using all the query control systems that you always had. So basically, you are able to say, you know, I don't want you to, for example, do dummy brute force queries in which you just do select each element for every row and column.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (47:04 - 47:05)
Row by row, yeah.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (47:06 - 47:16)
Exactly. So you, it's up to you. It's up to the data owner.


The data owner decides the, let's call them privacy policies dependent on the queries.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (47:17 - 47:27)
So you could, I guess, mix this in with differential privacy and make sure that the queries that are made don't reveal anything about the underlying data. If you really wanted full privacy. OK.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (47:27 - 48:23)
Absolutely. A very interesting system that we built as well is associated this with what is called a privacy budget. And we have deployed this for a client.


So the client basically has a set of databases distributed and is trying to trade the data or trade information, inferences on the data. And so the privacy budget basically computes how much value is left in the database or in the data source after it has been queried a few times or et cetera, et cetera. And that influences then the price of the data set or the queries that are in the exchange because we have basically built a data pricing exchange for this client that sits on the verifiable database infrastructure that we've built.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (48:24 - 48:35)
So you can imagine that the databases start off with something like a hundred initially because no queries have been done. And that's when potentially the price of querying that is at the highest.


[Anna Rose] (48:35 - 48:35)
OK.


[Shyam Duraishwami] (48:36 - 49:32)
And as it gets closer and closer to this threshold, when you're cutting off access, then the price of the query drops. And then there's this race to go and mine as much data as you can by the time you get there so that you can be the first to acquire all of that data and kind of lock that data away. So yeah, this is an example of where with another client, which more on the Web2 side, they're going to have users with a lot of data specifically, let's say for the energy market and to understand the state of what is the available battery capacity in and around four vehicles in a given area.


They could actually go run these queries. They could also run queries to figure out when those assets are going to be charged? When are they going to drive?


And therefore that capacity won't be available. So this is an example of these distributed IoT systems where verifiable data directly from that IoT device could be super useful with privacy.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (49:32 - 49:46)
I have to ask one big question, which might, you know, start a fight, but it has to, I think it has to be addressed because it is one of the elephants in the room. How do I know as someone making queries to your database that the data in there is not junk?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (49:47 - 50:42)
In this case, what we will do, and we're going towards a production system in the next 18 months, this is kind of like the big exciting news that the last 18 months was proving to this Web2 major OEM that verifiable databases are performant enough for them to think about it as something that could go into production. So we've done a lot of trials with them. And now we're going as we head towards the direction of production in the next 18 months, which is amazing to have verifiable databases out in the world.


Then we would look at this question of, is the device that is generating the data actually going to sign it? And then you create this whole chain. At the moment, it's obvious in trials that the signing of the data isn't the complicated part.


It's much more, are you performant enough and what can I do with it? But as you get to the next phase where you have thousands of millions of these assets, then, yeah, we would just sign directly from that asset that is generating the data.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (50:42 - 50:51)
OK, so I'd like some kind of provenance guarantee on top of the guarantee I get from my queries. Exactly. That's very cool.


That's a beautiful world if we get there.


[Anna Rose] (50:53 - 51:18)
You know, with a lot of the ZK systems and this type of cryptography, you know, security is a big issue. You've designed sounds like, you know, something using lots of different techniques, not exactly in a wheelhouse of like a proven system. So how are you thinking about security, stability, like making sure that this is working, but also making sure that it's, you know, not going to be broken?


And actually, maybe even a follow up to that is what happens if it is broken?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (51:19 - 51:23)
Like what is the worst that can happen? Well, nobody has broken KZG yet.


[Anna Rose] (51:24 - 51:28)
And it's based on that. So you are using something proven. Fair.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (51:28 - 51:34)
Yeah. So I'm kind of confident given the algebra of KZG.


[Anna Rose] (51:34 - 51:39)
But wait, weren't there these KZG-like vulnerabilities or was it like in an implementation?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (51:40 - 51:46)
No, there's implementations and there's the quantum threat. But KZG otherwise is sound as it gets.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (51:46 - 51:57)
The quantum, because it's based on pairings, etc. But we are going to worry about quantum threats when quantum computers come. And I have my own opinions about that.


[Anna Rose] (51:57 - 52:12)
By the way, Nico, we have to do some episodes on the scepticism because I feel like we've mostly talked like in a very like quantum is coming, we better get ready. But I, you know, there are voices that don't agree with this.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (52:13 - 52:28)
Yeah. And there was a very interesting post in LinkedIn by the CTO of a very well known quantum computing company recently that was very revealing on that. But I assume we don't name names.


[Anna Rose] (52:29 - 52:29)
OK.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (52:30 - 53:07)
You're on the podcast. But yeah. So coming back to your question, KZG is at the core of what we do.


So nobody has broken it yet. The algebra is also simple. Algebraic attacks on those type of commitments, the pairings protocol that is used behind this are also very well known.


So we are not to worry. Of course, you know, we wrote our own code, etc., etc. So there is a point in which we should go for an audit.


Wouldn't that be nice? Of our code. And so that's probably going to come soon, I think.


[Anna Rose] (53:08 - 53:13)
All right. So we're almost on time. What can folks look out for going forward with provably?


[Shyam Duraishwami] (53:13 - 54:18)
I think in 2024, when we first started out, we didn't do that much with AI and Proovably is called Proovably.ai on the domain name side. I think about that time. Yeah, yeah.


So it felt inevitable that we will stumble into that world. And this year is very interesting because a couple of years ago, it was very much about what one agent can do? Now we are going into much more of a multi-agent framework and multi-agent setup everywhere, whether you're in an enterprise or everywhere, it's agents talking to agents.


And here the performance, there are a lot of data integrity issues. And this is something that is very much on our radar. And the stuff that we're doing around data markets reveals a lot of, you know, greenfield things for us to do there.


And therefore, I think we will do stuff this year around solving data integrity between agents, like handing off data from one agent to another and allowing verifiability there. At the moment, verifiability in that space is able to only detect about one in three errors. So there's like a big space for, can you increase that?


That's like a very mainstream problem. So that's like one example.


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (54:19 - 54:52)
From my point of view, we are doing a lot of exciting things. So we have also implemented the first system that uses some very complex game theory techniques. It's called the Mean Field Game Theory.


And we have deployed it with 10,000 agents running. So we have actually seen some pretty amazing results that we were not expecting on how the stability of a verifiable system is affected by the agents, etc. by this game theory engine that we are building.


[Anna Rose] (54:52 - 54:53)
Do you have an article out on that?


[Emanuele Ragnoli] (54:54 - 55:19)
No, but I have to basically deploy it into the proof of concept for the client by the end of March. And I'm working on it, something like probably 10 hours per day, seven days per week. Oh, OK.


So once I'm done with this, yes, Shyam and myself, we have a long string of blogs and articles to write about that.


[Anna Rose] (55:19 - 55:46)
Well, maybe some of these will be out by the time this airs. If not, I guess folks should keep an eye out on your channels to see if they're coming out. Cool.


Thank you, Emanuele and Shyam, for joining us on the show to share with us all the work you've been doing with provably, the idea of verifiable databases, kind of how they interact with existing databases, what kind of use cases they open up. And yeah, thank you so much for digging in with us.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (55:46 - 55:58)
Thanks for having us. Thank you for having us. Thank you.


It was really, really fun getting to talk more about provably on air rather than in private, as we usually do, and talk about the fun things. Like, how do we name this thing? Nice.


[Anna Rose] (55:59 - 56:06)
All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Hector, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.