[Anna Rose] (0:11 - 2:10)
In this week's episode, I catch up with Georgios Konstantopoulos, James Prestwich, and Tarun Chitra. We talk about their takeaways from DEVCON 5, what's on their mind, and how they feel about the explosion in zero-knowledge research. Before we start, we want to say thank you to this week's sponsor, Trail of Bits.

Trail of Bits recently shared their review of this year's IACR Crypto Conference on the Trail of Bits blog. They highlighted some of the major themes of the conference, including the importance of getting basic cryptographic primitives right. As they reported, systems ranging from TLS servers and Bitcoin wallets to state-of-the-art secure multi-party computation protocols were broken when one small sub-component was either chosen poorly or misused.

The blog also highlighted the ascendance of cryptographic tools for privacy-preserving computation, such as zero-knowledge proofs, secure multi-party computation, and secure messaging systems. For more on their thoughts from the conference and what they see on the horizon in the industry, check out a link to their blog in the show notes. So thank you again, Trail of Bits.

One last thing before we start. The Zero-Knowledge Summit is coming up fast. It's happening on October 26th in San Francisco.

It promises to be a day packed full of some of the best research in the zero-knowledge space. If you happen to be in the Bay Area for San Francisco Blockchain Week and want to check it out, please do apply. I'll share the link in the show notes.

I hope to see you there. And now, here's my conversation with Tarun, James, and Georgios. What did you just say?

[James Prestwich] (2:11 - 2:14)
It's the first lines from a poem that are also the alphabet.

[Anna Rose] (2:14 - 2:26)
Oh, wow. Cool. So I'm sitting with James, Georgios, and Tarun on this last day of DevCon.

Welcome to the show, guys.

[James Prestwich] (2:26 - 2:28)
Hi. It's good to be here. Nice to be back.

[Anna Rose] (2:29 - 2:47)
I want to start off with James and Tarun. You've both been on the show before. I'll actually put links to the shows that you guys were on in the show notes, so anyone can find out what you've been working on maybe in more detail.

But why don't we do a quick intro and tell us what you've been up to since you were on the podcast. Let's start with you, James.

[James Prestwich] (2:48 - 3:17)
So since last time I was on the podcast, we've brought Bitcoin SPV to several more chains. So we're now available in Solidity, Golang, and ECMAScript, and we have an upcoming Rust implementation with Wyzen Bindings. We finally announced TBTC that we've been working on for almost a year now with Georgios and other people.

And TBTC is the first project of our new trade group, Cross-Chain Group, which aims to work on applications across multiple chains.

[Anna Rose] (3:18 - 3:18)
Who are we?

[James Prestwich] (3:19 - 3:25)
Well, we is Summa, Keep, and a few other companies will probably be joining very shortly.

[Anna Rose] (3:26 - 3:29)
Very cool. Tarun, what's new with you?

[Tarun Chitra] (3:29 - 4:22)
Yeah, we at Gauntlet have been kind of growing and moving towards basically doing a lot more financial simulation for Ethereum smart contracts. A little less on this proof-of-stake side, I think there's kind of a little less demand on the kind of pure financial modelling side right now, because right now everyone's focussing on engineering. But in the DeFi world, I think a lot of these contracts have got a lot of liquidity, like Compound and Uniswap, are starting to try to attract more sophisticated institutional investors and that they're kind of, they're really needing stress tests and things of that nature.

So we've been focussing on that and have been thinking about a lot of new financial attacks on proof-of-stake currencies.

[Anna Rose] (4:22 - 4:31)
Oh, cool. Lastly, Georgios, I want you to introduce yourself. This is the first time you're on the Zero Knowledge podcast.

So why don't you tell people who you are, what you're doing?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (4:32 - 5:19)
Thank you for having me, Anna. So my name is Georgios. Currently, I'm an independent consultant and researcher focused on Layer 2 scalability solutions and interoperability solutions, always with security in mind first.

Most of my work has been on the Plasma side of things. Lately, I've been working more and more on the roll-up constructions, like primarily the optimistic roll-up technique. And lately, I've been spending time with James on TBTC, which is an amazing protocol that you should all check.

And I've also been spending a lot of my time working on the Interledger protocol, which is a protocol for interoperability that is agnostic with respect to the Ledger, the settlement layer that you're using.

[Anna Rose] (5:20 - 5:26)
Neat. And like, so you mentioned roll-up here, but I think of you very much as like also existing in the Zero Knowledge community.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (5:27 - 5:28)
I try to keep up.

[Anna Rose] (5:30 - 5:49)
Cool. All right. So now we're here on the last day of DevCon.

We're in Osaka. That's where I was this year. I want to hear from all of you what your thoughts were.

And I think maybe to start, let's just do like an overall. What was your overall thoughts of DevCon 5 here in Osaka?

[Tarun Chitra] (5:50 - 7:02)
I think something I find kind of interesting is that other large public blockchains were the biggest sponsors this year. And there were a lot of other layer ones presenting at DevCon. And I kind of got the feeling that the Gaga days of late 2017 and early 2018, where people thought you could bootstrap a new community for each and every one of these many layer one chains has turned into, wow, there's the social proof you need from the Theorem community if you're going to expand.

And we saw things like AVA, you know, supporting ETH. We saw, well, a somewhat confusing launch of OpenLibre. And, you know, it was interesting to watch the mix of layer ones, other layer ones.

The only other comment I'll add is it did seem a little weird that they got main stage. These other layer ones, other like Ethereum competitors were on the main stage, but people working on Ethereum projects were in kind of off in different rooms. And I feel like it seemed a little weird to me.

[James Prestwich] (7:03 - 8:06)
A lot of my DevCon experience focused around ETH2. There were a lot of workshops and research breakouts and discussions around it. I gave a presentation on cross-chart communication.

You know, generally, the people working on ETH2 seem extremely confident about it, while the people who aren't working on it are generally more sceptical of it. So I think that we're seeing many different implementation strategies for ETH2. We're seeing them try to bake rollups into the shards themselves via execution environments.

We're seeing a lot of like very high level details of the later phases of ETH2 change very rapidly. And I think it's perfectly reasonable to have uncertainty and healthy scepticism of it. So that's kind of been what DevCon's been about for me, is trying to figure out where ETH2 is going.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (8:06 - 9:20)
So for me, instead of being about where ETH2 is going, it's where layer two is going. Because we saw the result of a very big effort, the state channels initiative, where like eight different projects merged and standardised on a specific way of like talking to each other on the protocol layer, on the networking layer, and so on. But currently, the design space is changing in the sense that everybody, literally everybody, wants to do the rollup thing.

And right now, everyone's trying to figure out what's the optimal trade-off space. Because currently, the rollup seems to be the layer one of layer twos. You have the layer one, the public blockchain that you're using, you have the rollup, which you just dump data on, and then you will be able to perhaps build plasma on top or channels on top and so on.

So a lot of my time is spent trying to figure out what will the layer two stack look in the end? Will it be layer one on top of it, rollup on top of it, plasma on top of it, channels on top of it, interledger maybe like for everything speaking to each other?

[James Prestwich] (9:21 - 9:22)
How many layers is that?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (9:23 - 9:26)
We're way past layer two, yes.

[James Prestwich] (9:26 - 9:30)
Also, every time someone says rollup, I can only think of fruit rollups.

[Tarun Chitra] (9:31 - 10:06)
So actually, to that point, one thing that I think is funny is the word rollup in the last two months has dramatically grown in scope. If you look at say, ETH Research or Telegram or anywhere where people are talking about this stuff, to the point that the word means almost anything you can imagine that has a data availability problem. But there's a zero-knowledge rollup, there's an optimistic rollup, and they have very different security and performance guarantees.

And yet, if you go to some of these talks, people say rollup, rollup, rollup, but they don't specify which one.

[Anna Rose] (10:06 - 10:17)
Is it sort of replacing plasma? Where is rollup exactly? To me, it's about sort of like an off-chain or a side-chain then being brought back on.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (10:18 - 11:23)
So the difference between the rollup, which is literally exactly the same technique as the one that's going to be used for execution environments, is that instead of you're just dumping raw data somewhere, instead of putting everything off-chain, it's an on-chain data protocol with off-chain execution. The optimistic rollup uses fraud proofs, the ZK rollup uses validity proofs. The data that you put on-chain is different in one case and in the other.

And the rollup, what it solves, it doesn't solve the data availability problem, but it kind of like works around it by saying that we will only advance state if the data is put somewhere that we can all verify where it is. And by solving the data availability problem, quote-unquote, you can have arbitrary state transitions happen while in plasma, where the data availability problem still exists, you're very much limited into what you can do in order to maintain safety.

[James Prestwich] (11:23 - 11:41)
Of course, data availability is very expensive. You can think of it as one of the primary problems that public blockchains solve. And that's why any kind of rollup only gets you a small constant factor improvement in throughput.

[Tarun Chitra] (11:42 - 12:02)
One other thing, I guess, about rollups is the design space is still quite large in terms of there's a trade-off of time for safety and compute. There's sort of like the three axes, and I really don't like these trilemmas, so I'm three somewhat dependent coordinates.

[James Prestwich] (12:02 - 12:03)
Can we call it Tarun's triangle?

[Tarun Chitra] (12:05 - 12:36)
I prefer simplex, because this is a simplex. And you can generalise that to more than three parameters. But I think those trade-offs are going to be very important to which ones get adopted and used, and I think you're seeing a lot of experiments that are engineering-driven in the rollup space versus purely theoretically driven in other parts of the zero-knowledge world.

So I'm pretty optimistic about that.

[Anna Rose] (12:39 - 12:45)
We can totally come back to these topics, but before that I want to hear a little bit more about what was your favourite talk?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (12:45 - 13:26)
I really liked a talk on stablecoins, which the name of the talk was Deleveraging Spirals Causing Instability of Stablecoins, which I found to be very interesting because they actually do modelling and science, which we're missing a bit in the industry, which is very much into Tarun's expertise. Like actual modelling, which shows how certain actions of actors can affect the results, can affect the DeFi ecosystem. While currently everyone's just putting money in the DeFi ecosystem and we don't know what's going to happen when everything blows up.

[Anna Rose] (13:26 - 13:32)
Actually, Tarun, what do you think about that? You must be paying a lot of attention to this. Did you see that talk too?

[Tarun Chitra] (13:33 - 15:34)
I've actually seen a re-edit of that talk in New York. But I think there are a lot of these types of financial attacks that people are really worried about as the total contract values go up. I think getting from the hundred million dollars in a contract to a billion dollars in a contract scaling jump is going to take a lot more analysis of both these contracts and these weird liquidation events that look similar to a lot of things from the financial crisis, but sped up.

The interesting thing is there was recently a day where ETH had this really large price drop and a lot of the services that are supposed to close their CDP for you before you get liquidated, they actually couldn't get enough block space to actually do the operation of closing your CDP for you. That's the closest we've actually come. The interesting thing is there's just enough competition for block space and there's not so much block space that it's actually very hard to execute this type of attack.

But in a world where there's actually more throughput and scalability, it becomes way easier to execute this type of attack. I think I spent a bunch of time talking with people about why we haven't seen some of these live. There's kind of this limited block space kind of helps you in some ways.

I guess I would add one other thing, which is that I think there's going to be multiple fronts under which scalability is changing within this space. One is financial scalability, like can we really support more than X dollar equivalent locked into a contract that interacts with the actual transaction scalability? And we're going to see a lot more of these interactions leading to sort of malicious but very interesting to think about attacks and events.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (15:35 - 15:56)
So to rephrase what you said, you mean that currently these attacks are not successful because an attacker is not fast enough, cannot get his transaction in fast enough. But if we had a Uniswap run over channels, for example, and where the attacker could do an instant state update, this could have been much more dangerous.

[Tarun Chitra] (15:57 - 16:58)
Yes. One other thing, actually, speaking of the other proof-of-stake networks, I think you're starting to see a lot of them trying to build in lending and stablecoin primitives directly into the base consensus layer. So I think the most famous example is Celo, who you've had on the show pretty recently.

But I think even the other proof-of-stake layer one projects I talked to, a lot of them want to find ways for validators to actually make income streams that aren't just keeping up with inflation. And some of those income streams involve letting you lend against or borrow against your locked stake token, kind of the same way you borrow against your ETH in Maker. And I've been hearing a lot of very interesting, crazy ideas, because I think people are starting to realise it's going to be hard for validators to make money if they are just keeping up with inflation and taking an ever-shrinking pie of the basis point spread on that.

[James Prestwich] (16:59 - 17:22)
You know, there are some other revenue streams that are available to validators. We call it miner extractable value, and generally it's executing the kinds of attacks that we were talking about earlier. Validators and miners are in a privileged position to execute any kind of attack they want for no gas instantly, because they make the blocks.

[Tarun Chitra] (17:22 - 17:30)
For sure, and I think the roll-up stuff will change the cost, the price, you know, the sort of cost plus, as we said with Uniswap.

[Anna Rose] (17:30 - 17:38)
But are you saying, like, another way that validators can make money is just to corrupt the system? Sounds horrible.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (17:38 - 17:48)
They're not corrupting the system. They're performing valid actions which abuse badly designed mechanisms. Code is law.

Yes.

[Tarun Chitra] (17:48 - 18:40)
Speaking of my favourite talk, actually, it was definitely Phil Dian's talk on free will, and it was something about how do you quantify extractable value in a smart contract, and what are the formalisms to bound, say, the total amount of value that any single validator can extract by basically having a bribing contract or making cartels or different types of behaviours. And I think that we're going to see a lot more of that in the proof-of-stake world. In proof-of-work, it's actually really hard to, because the actual asset that is earning you, is paying for sort of fees, is separate from the way of generating it by burning energy, you don't have a lot of these kind of extractable events.

There's a much smaller surface area.

[James Prestwich] (18:40 - 19:09)
And the other aspect is that proof-of-work miners tend to have more avenues of optimisation than stakers do. So proof-of-work, your primary expense is electricity, and you can always search for cheaper electricity and hardware, and you can always search for better manufacturing processes. You are likely to save more money doing that than you would by pursuing miner extractable value in many cases.

[Tarun Chitra] (19:10 - 19:32)
I want to shill for James, because he doesn't want to shill his own article, but he, Hasu, and Brandon Curtis from Radar wrote a pretty cool article on this, trying to quantify miner extractable value for proof-of-work chains. That's definitely worth reading.

[James Prestwich] (19:32 - 19:51)
It's been in the works for months and months, and we've rewritten it so many times, and I'm super excited it's finally at the door. It just came out yesterday, I think. It's hard to tell with time zones.

Hasu deserves most of the credit. It's his model. Brandon and I provided input and review, mostly.

[Anna Rose] (19:52 - 20:17)
But going back to the derivatives idea, are these protocols actually building it into it? It's not like you're doing wrapped. So basically, in Cosmos, where you have a lot of tokens already staked, I've heard proposals, I don't know if this is actually live, where they'd actually create wrapped tokens on another chain.

It's like promises. It's like IOUs on what's been staked or something like that.

[Tarun Chitra] (20:17 - 21:05)
But to be fair, if you use MakerDAO or use Compound, you sort of have the same thing, because you convert your asset into the wrapped version of that asset. The difference is that the next generation smart contract platforms, a lot of them are going to have the staking mechanism as a smart contract. So right now, the actual code that checks, hey, you transferred X Ethereum.

Does it meet all the requirements or all the signatures? Are they valid? Is this account allowed to transfer to this account?

More or less. That's all done in the client code, separate from the smart contract side. But implementing staking, like the rules of staking in the smart contract, makes it extremely easy to generate the derivatives in the same smart contract or in another smart contract.

[Anna Rose] (21:05 - 21:22)
Are you talking about the tokens that decided to stay on Ethereum, then? Are these like the ERC-20 type protocols, where it still lives on Ethereum? Or are these also like the layer one, new, completely new protocols?

Do they have all of their validation being done through smart contracts?

[Tarun Chitra] (21:23 - 21:49)
The rules of validation are done through smart contracts. So for instance, if I want to set the monetary policy of there's an inflation rate of this amount, that's just executed in the smart contract. That computes what the current block reward is.

And then when a validator is chosen by, say, a VRF, the VRF is executed as a smart contract, too, that chooses a random address and then gives them a block reward.

[James Prestwich] (21:51 - 22:00)
Generally speaking, newer proof-of-stake systems have much less of a division between contracts and consensus. Do you think that's a fair description?

[Tarun Chitra] (22:00 - 22:42)
Yeah, I think the idea is to make consensus a first-class object so that it's implemented as a smart contract. And I think, you know, Facebook in particular with Move, I think one of the cool things about the language is that they force the smart contract developers to think about move-only semantics. So Ethereum is scarce, and the scarce object can't be copied.

It needs to be movable only. Making that very apparent to a developer who's writing a dApp or a smart contract, having that as a first-class object makes it much easier to implement the other client code just as a smart contract itself.

[Anna Rose] (22:42 - 22:48)
Can you just really quickly give me a couple examples of protocols that are coming out that have that construction that you just mentioned, where it's very, very close?

[Tarun Chitra] (22:49 - 22:55)
Zello, Facebook, Solana, probably ETH2. I actually have no clue.

[James Prestwich] (22:55 - 22:58)
Well, it's very hard to say anything about ETH2 beyond phase 0.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (22:58 - 23:08)
The original idea on ETH2 was that Casper would be, not before it was called ETH2, was that Casper FFG would have been a smart contract. On ETH1? Yes.

[James Prestwich] (23:08 - 23:09)
Yeah.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (23:09 - 23:16)
So this idea has been around for a while. It's just that now we're seeing people actually start to deploy it. Yep.

[James Prestwich] (23:17 - 24:33)
So going back to staking derivatives a little bit, the main thing to know about them is that they're literally unpreventable. You can't actually force someone to lock up an asset because I can always make a side bet with someone else. I can always go to Georgios and ask for liquidity on my locked-up asset.

The question is how difficult it is to do that and how much, like, slippage or premium I will pay in order to get liquidity. You can't prevent people from trading things they own. So we're kind of seeing some chains try out the Netflix model of staking derivatives, where instead of having these off-chain pirate derivatives that are freely traded, some chains are trying to provide an approved, okayed ecosystem for staking derivatives on-chain so that they don't have weird side markets interfering with their consensus process.

One of the ideas is that it'll just be so much easier to use the approved market that undesirable from a consensus security perspective instruments will be less common.

[Tarun Chitra] (24:34 - 25:07)
And I would add one other thing, which is that they're designed with the idea of the cost of putting an oracle or some other way of getting an external price feed into the underlying network has to be a lot more expensive than the on-chain version. So you basically try to adjust the economics of these instruments, both at the transaction fee level and at, like, kind of turnover level to kind of make it too expensive to have to interact with, like, an off-chain centralised exchange.

[Anna Rose] (25:07 - 25:08)
This is cool.

[James Prestwich] (25:08 - 25:18)
A concrete example of this happening in the past is Tezos were traded on multiple different venues long before Tezos launched.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (25:19 - 25:46)
The same thing was happening also for ICO tokens. People were buying tokens via smart contracts. Let's say I have, like, XYZ ICO.

I would send my Ether to my smart contract. The smart contract would check how many tokens I would get from the ICO. It would, like, mint, like, this many coins at that smart contract, and then this would be one-to-one redeemable for the tokens from the ICO crowd-sell contract once they were liquid.

[James Prestwich] (25:47 - 26:09)
Right. And so because anybody can offer this and multiple major exchanges have done so in the past, we should really expect to see ETH2 staking derivatives available on the open market long before ETH2 has smart contracts or even transfers of assets.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (26:11 - 26:13)
What would be the relationship between them?

[James Prestwich] (26:14 - 26:34)
Well, because you can always buy one staked ETH2 for one Ether, there must be a price cap. It can't be worth more than one Ether, which implies that ETH2 will be worth less than Ether by whatever we value the staking revenue at.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (26:35 - 26:45)
If there is a way to go back from ETH2 to ETH1, would that change the price relation versus if it was only a one-way peg?

[James Prestwich] (26:45 - 26:46)
Yes, definitely.

[Tarun Chitra] (26:47 - 27:40)
Yeah, one other way of thinking about this is if you make... Imagine you have two different prices in transaction fees for going from ETH1 to ETH2, like one Ether to one Beacon ETH, and a price going from one Beacon ETH to one Ether, and they're two separate prices. You can think of the case where what's happening in phase 0 looks like having one of the prices be infinite and the other one zero.

But in reality, a smooth transition to this would basically be to make it very asymmetric, so make it cost in transaction fees, 100x what it costs for one direction relative to the other, and then slowly bring that ratio down until it hits parity. That would be a way to smoothly go from having this price delta until you get it to converge right when you are launching further phases.

[James Prestwich] (27:41 - 27:57)
And it's worth noting that it will converge as ETH2 becomes more tightly integrated with ETH1, and you have two-way asset transfers and things like that. It's just likely to be very messy based on what we know about the market dynamics right now.

[Tarun Chitra] (27:58 - 30:36)
I want to actually give a little bit of historical context to this idea of having staking derivatives, or this theorem we're sketching out that's claiming you must have derivatives the moment you have a capital asset that you're trying to make scarce versus a physical asset like energy that is naturally scarce and you don't have to force scarcity on it. In the normal financial world, an interesting fact about U.S. reserves is there's much less money that's actually cash floating in the U.S. supply than there is other types of money supply. Most U.S. companies don't hold cash. They actually have very little cash. One of the reasons that this has flipped since the financial crisis is that during the financial crisis, there were enough banks that failed and companies that had their money at banks without deposit insurance. In the U.S., every bank has to offer you deposit insurance up to $250,000. But for companies which have bigger cash flows or have more cash sitting around, that doesn't protect them enough. They might have millions of dollars in bank account. What happened was after that failure, in order to replicate deposit insurance, a market called the repurchase agreement market grew a lot.

How the repurchase agreement market works is actually very similar to a lot of these semi-collateralised derivatives in crypto. I'll give you the high-level version of this. Instead of having cash, you go and buy bonds.

U.S. treasuries are considered the most cash-like asset. You're Apple. You get $100 million today.

You go buy $100 million of treasuries. Let's say tomorrow you have to build a new factory and you need to get $100 million in cash to pay Foxconn or something. Then what you have to do is you basically lend your bonds out for cash.

Then you go and buy the factory. Because you're Apple and you have cash flow, your lenders trust you to pay it back in a week once you've sold some more iPhones. This system looks very similar to a lot of the on-chain lending platforms.

It's just that the pricing mechanism is very different.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (30:36 - 30:43)
I think that what you just described is very similar to what was being done with CDAI and RDAI and all these DAI derivatives.

[Anna Rose] (30:45 - 30:53)
The iterations are incredibly fast, what you're describing. You say it like it was far in the past. This was like six months ago.

[Tarun Chitra] (30:53 - 31:09)
75% of U.S. dollars that exist in bank databases are in the repurchase agreement market. So very little of the real dollars that are outstanding in the world actually are not held in bonds.

[James Prestwich] (31:09 - 31:10)
That's a lot of dollars.

[Anna Rose] (31:12 - 31:45)
Given that I have you three here, one of the topics that I'd really like to talk about is sort of the state of things. Since we're just wrapping up DEVCON, we can talk about the state of Ethereum. What's happening in Ethereum right now?

In 2017, there was a very distinct thing happening, culture, moment, whatever. 2018 also had this sort of like, it was crypto winter, there's a lot of positivity, there's a lot of excitement, there's a lot of building. People seemed pretty pumped.

How do they feel this year? What was the sort of sentiment this year?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (31:46 - 33:02)
I think that people are sobering up. Right now, it's no longer a situation where you raise a lot of money with just a white paper. You need to have a product and you need to find some product market fit if this thing exists in this industry beyond regulatory arbitrage and security fraud.

We're starting, finally, the scalability is coming soon, trademark, in the sense that things are starting to get built around the scalable protocols. DeFi is definitely the narrative that will stick around. And I'm looking forward to seeing how the competitors will actually react to this because the competitors of Ethereum are very...

Ethereum accepts everybody. That's why the Ethereum culture is very well known for. But come as you are, we're going to take you in.

And as Darun said earlier, we saw that with the sponsors and the main stage talks by competitors. However, what I haven't figured out yet is what will the competitors do?

[James Prestwich] (33:03 - 33:16)
I would expect they'd copy any portion of the DeFi ecosystem that finds product market fit. But do you guys think anything in DeFi has product market fit yet?

[Tarun Chitra] (33:17 - 34:55)
I think the interesting thing is that, at least coming from the New York side of things, I do hear institutions and more traditional hedge funds as opposed to crypto-native funds being interested in a lot of the on-chain lending products more as just a way to diversify some of their lending risk, ironically, in some ways. I think the thing that has the best product market fit, and this is, I guess, maybe somewhat controversial, is Tether, which is the ultimate tool of traders and regulatory arbitrage. The other thing is the fiat-backed stablecoins have not had any blacklisting.

So if you go and look at USDC, the blacklist function has never been called. That's why it's kind of funny that it's getting lent on Compound. So you can basically get a KYC dollar, lend it on Compound to someone who's not KYC'd, and kind of get around the system.

So a lot of regulatory arbitrage stuff is working really well. There's also a lot of India- and China-focused companies that are trying to be like Betterment or Wealthfront. So you put in some fiat and they help you get into crypto, and then they go and lend and get you some yield.

I think there's some of this personal finance type of stuff that seems to actually be... The narrative seems to be striking a tone with people who are very different than the crypto-native users. So that's just my, at least from the DeFi perspective.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (34:56 - 35:41)
What I want to talk about to you, James, and you, Tarun, is currently I think that there is, for me at least, there's a big question. How do you build a business that makes money in this industry? Making money.

And they have the following constraints. No token. Your business does not reduce to being an exchange.

So on-boarding, off-boarding platforms are exchanges. Uniswap, you could argue, has some exchange-like structure. How do you generate revenue without margins going to zero fast and other than consulting?

Not VC, revenue. I have customers that use the product. The product makes money.

[James Prestwich] (35:41 - 36:50)
You know, it hasn't escaped my notice that all three of us work in services to other projects, essentially. Sumo tends to work with Layer 1 chains, building interoperability solutions. Tarun at Gauntlet tends to work on agent analysis for other projects, Proof of Stake and DeFi systems.

Georgios, I know you've been involved as a consultant in a number of research projects on Layer 1 and Layer 2. We've all kind of answered that question the same way, is we're providing non-recurring engineering work for other teams. And those other teams are all VC funded or token funded, which usually means VC funded.

For now, we're all just trying to make revenue where we can. And I think we're all really searching for recurring revenue, something that's a sustainable product. And so based on where all our businesses are at here, I don't know that you're going to get a solid answer for how to build that.

We're all still searching, I think.

[Tarun Chitra] (36:50 - 38:26)
And I will say, I guess the businesses that I think staking has helped launch will seem quite unbundled right now. So node operation services like Bites and Trails, who was on the podcast earlier. Custodians, especially as people seemingly want these MPC style custody instead of strictly multi-sig.

And broker dealers, so people who actually can provide sizable liquidity for holders. I think you're going to see those three businesses integrate. From a traditional financial view, those services are all sold by one vendor.

So if you're a hedge fund, you don't find a custodian who's separate from your prime broker, who's separate from the person who's getting your bond coupons for you. They're all the same, and it's the same service. And I think someone will find that aggregation at that layer that's, in my mind, slightly adjacent to exchanges.

It's exchange plus plus. I think that you can tell by their moves. They're all moving into staking.

They're all operating nodes. I think they're going to sell developer node operation like Infura or Alchemy. I think you're definitely seeing that happen, which is also going to just shrink the margins.

But at least there's a minimum when you have a physical hardware thing that you can kind of go to.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (38:27 - 38:31)
I'm trying to figure out, how can we grow the pie rather than redistribute wealth?

[Tarun Chitra] (38:32 - 38:48)
I actually have a question. I'm responding to your question with a question. But I vaguely remember something called an NFT that was supposed to be the pie-growing universe for online items, digital items.

What happened to that narrative?

[James Prestwich] (38:48 - 39:07)
I thought ERC-20s were supposed to be the pie-growing thing. Wasn't rich state on a chain supposed to be the pie-growing thing? Now DeFi is supposed to be the pie-growing thing.

I guess we've gone through a lot of things that haven't grown the pie that have always been supposed to be that thing.

[Anna Rose] (39:07 - 39:11)
I guess the answer to that question is... You guys don't know the answer to that question.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (39:12 - 39:13)
It's a thought experiment.

[Anna Rose] (39:14 - 39:51)
On that level, I actually want to talk about funding. I think your question was very much like how does a business make revenue? But I think there are other ways that companies, projects are funding themselves.

Sometimes they've actually added funding directly into the protocol itself. Founder rewards, block rewards. You have companies that have developed protocol and they're probably also going to move into staking and validation.

If you look at the Cosmos team and who the validators are in Cosmos, they've at least found ways to maintain their own livelihood through that. I'm wondering, what are your thoughts on all of these new ways of funding?

[James Prestwich] (39:51 - 40:19)
I'm generally sceptical of anything built into the protocol because it funds things. It funds people and people have control of those funds without the obligation to provide any value in exchange for them. This is why I am a fan of revenue focused businesses.

It's because if people are buying your product that means you're providing value.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (40:21 - 40:59)
You take something that is very objective like the protocol rewards. Currently, for example in Proof of Work, a block gets mined the rewards go somewhere. If you add a way for dev funds that get distributed based on some multi-sig then you took something that was perfectly objective and you made it subjective based on that multi-sig.

My whole idea for joining this industry was that I can have something I can observe completely objectively, like work is objective and Proof of Work is objective, so I want to avoid any form of subjectivity baked in the protocol.

[James Prestwich] (40:59 - 41:29)
Tying into that a little bit the whole thesis of blockchains is that incentives create results and that if there is a protocol sponsored stream of money being given out, that people will compete to get it. This is why I don't really understand the push towards governance and protocol-issued funds. If there is money being given out people will compete to get it.

[Tarun Chitra] (41:30 - 42:20)
One thing I will say about that that is weird in a lot of these new next generation networks is that there's not the homogeneity in node types and rewards as there is in Proof of Work. In a lot of staking networks there are many different types of validators. Some validators are actually executing the state transitions.

Some validators might get rewarded for providing data availability. Some, especially in the zero-knowledge world, will get rewarded for running proof generation like in Coda. Now you have a multi-agent problem where you have to design the reward structure such that you have a revenue split that everyone is happy with.

You now get back to this founder's reward problem with multiple node types.

[Anna Rose] (42:22 - 42:40)
I didn't think about it that way. That's interesting. I guess in this case the decision-making of the breakdown would have to happen or would likely happen before the launch?

Or do you imagine it actually being altered after launch has happened and then there's some small group that can make those decisions?

[James Prestwich] (42:41 - 42:44)
How much money is there to make by altering it after the launch has happened?

[Tarun Chitra] (42:45 - 43:09)
I think you're going to see both of them. I think even in the more permissioned blockchains I suspect we will also see some of these revenue-sharing agreements change quite dramatically as we've observed certainly with Libra and the change to the association members.

[Anna Rose] (43:10 - 43:46)
Wow. I hadn't thought about that. I hadn't thought about that connection between the issue with the subjectivity of block rewards and the distribution of that with these emerging protocols and all the different roles that validators and the various types of validators will take.

Since I have you here and this is actually going to be episode 99 of the podcast which is kind of cool, I really wanted to talk about the zero-knowledge space. I feel like at least all three of you have been observing it or acting in it, working with it. There's a lot going on right now.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (43:48 - 44:00)
There has been a so-called Cambrian explosion of schemes in 2019. We called it Snarktember, Snarktober. We'll see if we'll have Snarknovember, I guess.

[James Prestwich] (44:01 - 44:02)
Snarkember?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (44:02 - 46:22)
I don't know. Currently, we've been using a protocol that has cryptography, like Bitcoin and Ethereum all use cryptography that's been well known for more than 20 years. Even well standardised with wide support, very well explored, everything.

All the new protocols that are being released, yes, they might have amazing properties. Yes, they might get you constant prover time, constant verifier, low memory, no trusted setup or continued never-ending setup. However, you're using cryptography from 2019 that only 30 or even less people have read, let alone understand.

Let alone understanding and being able to evaluate the proofs. It's very far from each other. I may be able to read a paper and get the gist of it and explain it to somebody, but me evaluating the security proofs of the paper is a completely different level.

And it's usually the authors that are going to be able to do that only and maybe their academic reviewers in some peer-reviewed conference. The situation is that when these protocols get coded, you can have another problem because you have the spec and you have the protocol, you have the spec and you have the implementation. Each time you move from one to the other, there's even fewer people that can do it.

So the people that can currently implement and deploy these protocols are very few and I would still be very, very careful with what I'm going to be using from all of this. And let me take a moment to say that at the ZK Summit, which is coming up, in two weeks I will be doing a presentation on a map of the zero-knowledge proving systems that are being used today with the latest protocols which were released. And the title is going to be Growth 16 is Not Dead.

Because Growth 16 is one of the best protocols that we have to date. It works very well. It's been battle-tested to a good extent.

And I think that we should be a bit more conservative rather than trying to reinvent new stuff.

[Anna Rose] (46:23 - 46:37)
At the same time, why don't we give a little bit of context for the listeners? What kind of stuff is actually coming out? What's exciting?

I think what you've just described there is like, this is the issue with a lot coming out. But what is it like? What is coming out?

[James Prestwich] (46:37 - 46:47)
Snarks are the most widely known of these and there are a few different snark constructions dating back to 2013 or so. Maybe even a little earlier than that.

[Tarun Chitra] (46:48 - 47:01)
2012 quadratic arithmetic programmes compilation Gentry. 1988, Goldwasser, what are you talking about? I mean the first more practical thing was really the Gentry paper.

[James Prestwich] (47:01 - 48:40)
Man, I hate being on podcasts with people who know more than me. So, they only go back like seven years in practise, right? And the first ones were incredibly inefficient.

So, for example, when Zcash launched, their snark prover took like minutes to run. And the verifier was much more efficient, but still was computationally very expensive. Snarks have an additional downside, which is they need a trusted setup.

So, there has to be some trusted group of people that go through a process and throw away the toxic waste and do the whole thing. What we're seeing now is many, many different systems that improve on specific aspects. So, like, Groth16 is almost a strictly better version or a strictly better construction of the same kinds of proofs we saw in 2012.

But then you get into things like Sonic and Supersonic and Plonk and all of these other names that I'm going to forget. Each of them are improving some specific aspect of it. Maybe making the trusted setup reusable for many different proofs.

Maybe trying to remove the trusted setup. Maybe trying to have more efficient provers. We're seeing kind of exploration of some trade-off space that we don't understand very well yet.

We don't know what is possible and how efficient or small or pretty we can make these. So, we're trying a lot of things and seeing what has useful applications.

[Anna Rose] (48:40 - 49:19)
I've noticed as groups are trying to implement what's coming out, what is actually happening is groups that aren't deep in the research see so much flurry of activity. They're like, this is exciting, but we're going to wait until the dust settles before we start really deploying our engineering team, our engineering efforts towards these things. Because what if a brand new, like, underlying construction comes out in the next month or two, which is very possible, and it changes a lot of it.

That's at least what I've been hearing from some of the teams. It's kind of like the other side. It's the double-edged sword, right?

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (49:19 - 49:24)
Or what if an attack gets found because the proofs in the paper were wrong?

[Tarun Chitra] (49:24 - 49:47)
I will say one other thing, especially in the style of proof that's used for a lot of these constructions, is that they're not quite perfectly comparable assumptions between the different models, and actually knowing there's a sort of performance versus time versus security versus a few other things. Simplex, trade-off simplex.

[James Prestwich] (49:47 - 49:48)
Triangle?

[Tarun Chitra] (49:49 - 49:49)
Simplex.

[James Prestwich] (49:49 - 49:49)
Quadrangle?

[Tarun Chitra] (49:50 - 50:37)
That's why it's a simplex. It has a barycenter in all dimensions. It's...

Basically, we're also forgetting that we're drawing all these trade-offs on the same surface, but there's actually different security assumptions in a lot of these proofs, and a lot of them use different types of reductions. It's not just reading a single paper, and I think Georgios was sort of getting at this. It's like you need to know the whole dependency graph of all the papers beforehand, and understand when a certain assumption was relaxed or changed.

Knowing that whole body of knowledge ends up being really hard for a single person at a company to really be the expert on.

[James Prestwich] (50:38 - 51:34)
Right. Especially because this is an extremely complex field, and the work is so new. In ECDSA, we're typically using assumptions that are 20 years old, like discrete log problem stuff.

There's Starks, which are based on hashes, and those are using assumptions that are like 40 years old and battle-tested. A lot of zero-knowledge proofs coming out today are using knowledge of exponent assumptions, which are like 5 years old, really. We have new VDF stuff using class groups, which is maybe 10 years old.

We're seeing a lot of cryptography introduced that is based on poorly understood assumptions, or assumptions that haven't been tested in practise, or relaxed versions of older assumptions. It's extremely difficult for anyone who's not a full-time academic to keep up with.

[Anna Rose] (51:35 - 51:36)
And yet, we still try.

[James Prestwich] (51:37 - 51:38)
I don't try all that hard.

[Tarun Chitra] (51:39 - 52:36)
I think, at least personally, I will say, there was a while when I was very excited by what I would call the zero-knowledge porn that was coming out every week. And I really enjoyed reading these papers and having discussions with people. But the flood of the Gilgamesh event, the Cambrian explosion, sort of has made it hard to even care anymore.

It reminds me of Proof of Stake in 2016 and 2017. First you had Algorand, then you had Snow White from Rafael Paz and Elaine Shi. And, you know, there was just after that, there was this flood of provable Proof of Stake protocol papers.

I remember reading them and being like, oh, this is amazing. And then by the time I read the seventh one, I was like, they're all actually basically the same with a very tiny little difference because they're all chasing after ICO money.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (52:37 - 52:44)
And also, some papers that I've read, they're intentionally made very, very, very complex because complexity sells.

[Tarun Chitra] (52:47 - 52:50)
The sex sells of the cryptocurrency industry.

[James Prestwich] (52:51 - 53:01)
Complexity sells. If you know, if you've met Zaki Manian, you know that he likes to say that all other Proof of Stake systems are just tendermint with extra steps.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (53:02 - 53:06)
The infamous theorem of the tendermint reduction.

[Tarun Chitra] (53:07 - 53:53)
I will say that I suspect once we actually have simpler proofs for a lot of the zero-knowledge work that's coming out right now, we might be able to connect this morass of different theories and assumptions and get a good intuitive understanding. This oftentimes happens in mathematics where a difficult result is proved, and it's proved in a really complicated way, and then someone finds a much simpler version. And at each level of simpler proof, you get much more intuition into why it works.

Whereas the first really difficult thing was someone really straining and climbing Mount Everest for the first time, whereas each additional one is a better and better Sherpa guiding you up the mountain.

[Anna Rose] (53:54 - 54:07)
That's nice. Well, I really want to say thank you to all three of you for joining me on this podcast on our 99th episode. Is there anything else that you want to talk about before we sign off?

[Tarun Chitra] (54:08 - 54:54)
Yeah, I guess I had a question for basically everyone here, which is, I think we've seen a lot of interest in using Starks and Snarks for DEXs, but what are some other applications outside of Consensus and DEXs that excite you, especially with regard to the implementation? Because if you think about it, whichever application or layer or protocol implements any of these Prover Verifier systems, they will be designing it around their organisational structure and whatever their application actually is. And so it's interesting to think about how the code that gets written will reflect the first user who's writing it.

So what are some of those applications you're excited about?

[James Prestwich] (54:55 - 56:09)
I'm really interested in how we can use zero knowledge proofs in cross-chain communication, which is what I work on all the time and what I'm excited about. So we've been talking a lot recently about this concept we call observability. It's what can a chain practically know?

And part of this is what is deterministic and publicly verifiable, but the other part of it is what is cheap to verify, cheap enough that you can put it in a consensus process. And so zero knowledge proofs have this great property that they're publicly verifiable, deterministic, and a lot of them have constant time verification, so they can be extremely cheap to verify. And we can verify extremely large statements about reality in other systems in a very small amount of time cost.

So that might mean Coda's recursive SNARK structure making statements about the entire history of their chain and evaluating that from within some other chain's smart contract or consensus process.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (56:10 - 56:41)
I'm a fan of dark pools, but nobody wants to talk about it because it might be illegal to do. But I'm a big fan of the design and I think that once zero knowledge proofs get deployed more, we will see some kind of Uniswap with a built-in dark pool to be more robust to when a market participant wants to add a bunch of liquidity to it so that nobody can see that the market moved. Yeah, that is something I would like to see at some point.

[Anna Rose] (56:43 - 57:38)
Yeah, I mean, I think I'm quite interested in the interoperability use case for zero knowledge proofs. I've done a workshop with Chris Goes from Cosmos where we actually went through all these different ways that zero knowledge type constructions can be used in interoperability, not only as light clients, but in all these different ways. It was really cool.

And then, I mean, the topic that I wanted to talk about here at DevCon was about the idea of privacy and transparency and this balance that can be achieved through zero knowledge proofs, and that kind of takes the form of things like compliance or interactions with some regulators. A very unpopular topic in some circles, but I think that zero knowledge proofs in that context could be very, very interesting. That's a very real-world example that I'm using here, but thanks for that question.

How about you? Do you have anything?

[Tarun Chitra] (57:39 - 58:12)
I guess I'm in the frame of Georgios. Maybe not quite dark pools, but some other kind of liquidity provision without leaking identity, because in the normal markets, that happens via speed, not via brains. And so it's kind of interesting to think about what happens when you flip that dynamic.

What does trading look like? But again, it doesn't feel like that's a growing the pie use case, just to go back to earlier. It's just cool.

[Anna Rose] (58:13 - 58:27)
Okay. So listen, thanks again. This has been really cool to have this conversation with the three of you.

I hope each of you will come back on the podcast. Maybe I can also get you guys all back at the same time. Let's try this again.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (58:27 - 58:35)
Thank you very much for having us, Anna. Tyrone and James are among the people I most respect in this industry, so this was very nice and very insightful to me.

[Tarun Chitra] (58:36 - 58:45)
Yeah, thanks for having us, and congratulations on 99. You're almost a big milestone. I'm excited to see what you do for that episode.

[Anna Rose] (58:47 - 58:53)
Frederick will definitely be on that one. I'm sorry that Frederick isn't here in Osaka with us.

[James Prestwich] (58:53 - 59:02)
Thanks for having us, Anna. This has been really fun. It's nice to get a room full of friends together and talk about the state of things and where we think they're going.

I'm excited about it still.

[Georgios Konstantopoulos] (59:03 - 59:03)
See you next year.

[Anna Rose] (59:04 - 59:07)
To our listeners, thanks for listening.