[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:15)


Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Nico is joined by Will Cochran, Research Coordinator, and Raúl Kripalani, Peer-to-Peer Networking Lead, both working at the Ethereum Foundation.


This is our fifth episode in our 6-part leanEthereum mini-series. This conversation covers how the post-quantum signatures, SNARK aggregation, and LeanVM stack we discussed in earlier episodes are actually being integrated into real clients through devnets, specs, and cross-team coordination.


For these special episodes, we also have them in video form over on our YouTube channel. Links are in the show notes in case you want to check it out there, and be sure to subscribe to the channel while you're at it.


In this episode, Nico, Will, and Raúl explore the human and networking layers required to make leanEthereum work.


They discuss the challenges of coordinating independent teams, designing new peer-to-peer topology for much larger post-quantum signatures, and building the next generation ETH peer-to-peer stack.


This episode explores how Ethereum upgrades happen in reality through iteration, measurement, and tight collaboration across different teams and stakeholders.


Before we kick off, three quick points.


First, zkSummit is coming back with its 14th edition. Applications to attend are now open. It will be on May 7th in Rome, so hope to see you there.


Second, zkMesh+, our paid subscription tier, is rolling. We have released a few bonus clips over there, as well as some of our exclusive research reports. If you want to get access, please join the paid tier.


Third, if you're looking for other ways to support the show, we have donation accounts visible in the footer of our website. Support definitely goes a long way, so if you do decide to donate, thank you in advance.


That's all for now. Links are in the show notes. Now here is Nico's conversation with Will and Raúl.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:19 - 3:05)


Today, I'm here with Will Corcoran, Research Coordinator at the Ethereum Foundation, and Raúl Kripalani, Peer-to-Peer Networking Lead at the Ethereum Foundation.


This is episode 5 of our mini-series on the leanEthereum upgrade, and this one focuses on bringing everything we've seen so far to life, either through the human layer or the networking layer.


Hello, Will. Welcome to the show.


[Will Corcoran] (2:41 - 2:42)


Thanks for having me. How are you?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:42 - 2:44)


Very good, thanks. And hi, Raúl.


[Raúl Kripalani] (2:44 - 2:46)


Hi. Thanks for having me as well.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:47 - 3:05)


Yeah, it's great to have you both, because I've interacted with you online through all your coordination efforts or seen some of your work. So it's great to have you on the show.


I'm curious, as always, to hear what's your journey into ZK, and how did you get to the EF and to your current role?


Maybe we can start with you, Raúl.


[Raúl Kripalani] (3:06 - 4:08)


Yeah. So I've actually been in Ethereum for, I would say, eight years now. It was my entry point to blockchains. I am a distributed systems engineer and got extremely interested in the networking aspects of Ethereum.


So I joined ConsenSys back in the day, helped build an ETH1 client, specifically focusing on the networking layer, DHTs and protocols and RLPx back in the day and things like that.


And then eventually moved on to Protocol Labs, where I helped build some of the primitives that Ethereum is using today, specifically libp2p. I was leading that project. And kind of like made my way into the EF last year.


So I've been very connected with the ecosystem, helped shape the networking layer for the Beacon Chain and ETH2 back in the day. And yeah, so it feels great to come back and think about the evolution of the networking layer and actually really move it forward for the new stage of scaling that Ethereum is poised for.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (4:09 - 4:24)


I'll have many questions about what the networking layer is and what does that mean.


But before we get there, Will, I'm curious about you, actually, because you have a very different role to the guests we've had so far in that you don't deal with cryptography, but more with people, right?


[Will Corcoran] (4:24 - 6:25)


Yeah, and probably a different origin story, I guess. I was an architect for 15, 20 years, so designed and built buildings. And yeah, really, it was always a strong interest in technology, so using a lot of automation and simulation to design high-rises and things of that nature.


And then also on the very different end of the spectrum within architecture, doing construction management and on-site managing the construction crew and stuff. So managing these large builds really got me sort of prone to thinking like ecosystem-wide efforts.


So you manage and interact with a lot of people that you're not employed by the same company, but you're just trying to move in the same direction, same mission. Got to be able to speak a lot of different languages, technical design like layman.


And then my partner, she was also an architect and became a developer and ended up starting a Bitcoin wallet, and that kind of got me into the space.


And so I was working on a Bitcoin L2 called Stacks, ended up starting off as the grant programme manager, so programme management and getting a broader understanding of the technology that's being built on smart contract platforms.


And then that moved into ecosystem programme management. So working with the core devs on advancing major upgrades and things of that nature.


And then I saw Justin's Beam Day talk, and I'd been biding my time in terms of when I was going to reach out to Justin. It was something I really wanted to do for a long time. I used that as an opportunity and things synced up perfectly.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (6:11 - 6:13)


So would you say you're still in construction today?


[Will Corcoran] (6:15 - 6:25)


Definitely, yeah. Building blocks, not buildings. Now, there's so many transferable skills. It freaks me out sometimes.


[Raúl Kripalani] (6:25 - 7:02)


Yeah, I think it's pretty cool that you brought the two of us together, because we're very different layers of how Ethereum is being built and Lean specifically.


Will is focused on the social layer and bringing all clients together and kind of coordinating the efforts into a unified pipeline programme and so on. And I'm literally moving bytes on the wire, which is how really this multi-client network and multi-client set of efforts comes to life.


So we're kind of very distant on the end-to-end side of things, but at the same time, very close together.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (7:03 - 7:29)


So actually, this is a great segue into what I brought you guys here for, which is so far in the series, we've talked about leanEthereum is this big upgrade. Part of this upgrade is post-quantum, and we've talked a lot in previous episodes about post-quantum signatures, how to aggregate them with SNARKs, etc.


But now that we have those things, what do we do with them? And how does that fit into what is Ethereum?


[Raúl Kripalani] (7:30 - 8:24)


So Ethereum is continuing its scaling journey, and in its scaling journey, it needs to stay quantum secure, post-quantum secure, because this technology is inevitable. It's coming, so we need to make sure that we plan for it.


And from that perspective, Ethereum, I think, is really leading the charge in terms of research to verify these primitives, to actually develop some of these primitives, formally verify them, and then integrate them.


So I think what we do with them is basically put them all together in clients, and iterate, and iterate, and iterate, and battle test, and stress test, as we continue scaling the chain, as we're already doing, but then opening up new magnitudes of scale, as we have zkEVMs, and we have recursive SNARKs, and so on, bringing them together into clients and continuing this iteration journey.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (8:24 - 8:33)


So can I ask, what is a client in this context? Who are we talking about? And you mentioned earlier, moving bytes on the wire, what wire are we talking about?


[Will Corcoran] (8:34 - 12:05)


You could think of this whole leanEthereum sort of bootstrapping process, starting with Justin's Beam Chain talk, and then a lot of community calls and research, open research calls happening until EthCC last year, where we had Beam Day.


And at Beam Day, there were a lot of open group discussions, where we're finally able to get all these people that had these disparate areas of research and interest. There was also the practitioners, the client devs that were there, and talk about, okay, what's something actionable that we can build? We need a spec, we need something that we're building towards.


And so really, the first idea is like the critical path item that we had to be able to take care of first is signing these attestations, the validity of the block header, and being able to aggregate and pass those back and forth within the constraints of three-slot finality and 4-second slots.


And being able to do this, as Raúl was saying, with much larger signatures.


And so that much larger signature and the aggregation of those signatures is where the iterative DevNet comes in. So when you think about the EF, it's like a team of teams. And so we call these team of teams clusters.


And Raúl and I both work within the protocol cluster. And so the protocol cluster, you can think of like the core bread and butter is research, spec writing, testing, prototyping, and coordination.


And so one thing that's not included in that really is the development of the clients, the actual implementation work, with the exception of the legendary Geth team. So that's the one client team that's part of the EF.


All of the other client teams, whether they're consensus clients or EL clients on the current beacon chain, or these new Lean clients are all outside of the EF. And so, within the context of leanEthereum, there's actually 10 teams that are building towards this.


So 4, 5 brand new teams that are just starting up, and then several existing client team, consensus client teams that are interested in sort of prototyping and moving along with this research effort.


And so we started off with DevNet-0, which was just like, hey, we need a spec. Thomas, who you talked with earlier, he's championing the leanSpec. And so that's a fully executable spec.


And so starting off with, okay, we need a GitHub org and GitHub repos that everyone can contribute these specs to, write the specs, and then all the client teams need to have some bare minimum ability to communicate with one another.


So proof of concept interoperability was DevNet-0, DevNet-1 was signing these new signatures with XMSS primitives, the leanSig signature scheme.


And then we needed, that was DevNet-1. DevNet-2 was aggregating those with kind of naive concatenation. And now we're moving into like subnets and being able to aggregate these in more sophisticated ways.


And then Emil, who you spoke with, worked on LeanVM. That's all going to come together with recursive aggregation and DevNet-4.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (12:05 - 12:14)


So all these DevNets are slowly building towards like a full Ethereum network of... like is this consensus or is this execution? Is this both?


[Will Corcoran] (12:14 - 13:24)


This is just consensus. And so there's the ability to decide on the fork. So fork choice, there's the requirement to like reach finality. And then the way that you do that is through signing and aggregating these block signatures.


So you need to make sure that all the network participants are arriving at the same conclusions.


And so when you change something as fundamental as the signature size, and Justin mentioned in one of the earlier calls, like faster finality and the post-quantum signatures are both very invasive. And so the idea of trying to target one hard fork where all of this work would be introduced into Ethereum is sort of the spirit behind these DevNets.


And so within Lean, we're always shooting for an ethos of simplicity and optimality. And so all of the tooling, the specs, we're trying to go for minimal lines of code and the spec and concise design decisions and very small iterations and building up the complexity.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (13:25 - 13:33)


Within the EF, and then you give it out to external teams to write their own clients and then they can have their own like philosophy of implementation, right?


[Will Corcoran] (13:34 - 13:52)


No. So the Interop, the weekly call, that's ecosystem-wide. So that's client teams outside of the EF, research and testers within the EF. And so it's taken a village. And so really like all of that effort is involving a lot of different organisations, not just the EF.
[Nico Mohnblatt] (13:53 - 14:06)


Nice. I'm curious now about the technical aspect of the network. I guess the first fundamental question is, is it just a matter of plugging out BLS signatures, plugging in the new one and life is good, we're done?


[Raúl Kripalani] (14:07 - 14:16)


Definitely not. So as Will hinted, there is also a faster finality that we're aiming for.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (14:16 - 14:16)


What does that mean?


[Raúl Kripalani] (14:17 - 17:22)


Yeah. So that means arriving to economic firmness on the chain faster than we are today, which is 12 minutes. And there is a set of efforts that are ongoing. So one of them was 3sf-mini., that was one of kind of the designs for faster finality.


But there is now a dedicated fast finality team within the EF that is researching alternative methods and designs to arrive to even... to have kind of like a fast available chain that is able to advance really quickly and then have different models to arrive to finality on that chain in kind of like a way that can potentially gracefully degrade if at any point the network is degraded itself.


And I think this is where, as we push the boundaries on signature sizes and aggregation of those signatures and kind of like the whole revolving, I like to think of it as kind of like a revolving cycle, a pipeline that is just constantly moving to advance the network. We're really pushing on the boundaries.


So we do have EIP-7870, to be precise, is the one that defines bandwidth constraints, is the one that defines system requirements for running Ethereum, and is the one that governs CPU and memory requirements, but also bandwidth.


And this EIP is... the bandwidth requirements are moderate, because we want to keep Ethereum decentralised and universally accessible. And this is kind of like a governing principle for everything that we do, right?


So they are deliberately moderate. And this means that we have those constraints that were, as we push the boundaries of the amount of data that we need to move to validate the chain and to advance the chain on the wire, we're budging up against those constraints.


And of course, those constraints can move because over time, bandwidth will improve around the world, and Nielsen's Law says that every year, there's kind of like a 50% improvement. And of course, this is not uniform around the world, and it is not going to continue forever.


So, of course, we can move those, but for now, we're just staying under those constraints and trying to... because I think this is the way that we reach optimality. We need to push on the boundary, but at the same time, force ourselves to be extremely efficient.


And the way that we do that is by not increasing immediately the bandwidth requirements, just saying, okay, this is where we are.


And the reality is that Ethereum today is underutilising bandwidth. So it has this very, very spiky pattern on the critical path, where the network is mostly idle most of the time, except for when blocks are being propagated, when attestations are being propagated, and where aggregates are being propagated.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (17:23 - 17:24)


This is for the existing network, not like...


[Raúl Kripalani] (17:24 - 17:35)


For the existing network. Exactly.


So then one interesting aspect of Lean and PQ signatures is they become... they're really heavy.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (17:35 - 17:40)


Can you remind us actually the size difference? I think we've mentioned it in previous episodes, but it's always nice to have...


[Raúl Kripalani] (17:40 - 18:21)


Yeah. So a compressed BLS signature on the wire is around 180 bytes, and this is 96 bytes from... sorry, not the signature, I'm talking about an attestation. So 180 bytes is an attestation. The signature itself is 96 uncompressed.


And then you add the data about the attestation itself, so the slot and other fields, and then you add the enveloping on top of that, and you compress, and you get around 180 bytes.


And they compress very poorly, so it's like the actual raw payload would be a little bit higher than that, but not... so the compression rate is not good.


And because signatures are...


[Nico Mohnblatt] (18:22 - 18:25)


Which is to be expected with very dense information.


[Raúl Kripalani] (18:26 - 19:33)


Yeah, exactly. Signatures are effectively random, right? And then on the other side, we've got XMSS signatures, which are 3 kilobytes.


This is a working model, even though there are efforts to optimise and to potentially reduce them to 1 kilobyte, which is a moonshot, I'm being told.


But ideally, if we can get under the MTU size, which is the maximum transmission unit, which is a really important concept in networking, because if you send one byte on the wire, it's going to... I'm simplifying, but you can think about it, it's going to cost the same as writing an entire MTU.


And the MTU is around 1500. It can vary by path, by network path, and so on.


So ideally, if we can get it down to 1.2 kilobytes, it would be a really safe place where it opens up an entire design space for what's possible at the networking layer, because then we can use datagrams, we can move data in a more stateless way, and it becomes really, really interesting.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (19:33 - 19:46)


So stateless because we are saying one signature, one attestation fits into one sort of network unit, and we don't need to keep track of which units go together.


Okay. Like if you spread across multiple units....


[Raúl Kripalani] (19:46 - 21:20)


Yeah, exactly. You're no longer fragmenting, and then you can have packet loss on the network. And then if you lose a fragment, you're going to have to wait for a retransmit of that fragment. And that adds a roundtrip latency, which is something we would try to avoid.


But the really interesting aspect here is, I think the pipelining. So we want this really fast network that is fully utilising resources that are allocated to it.


Right now, as I said, the network is mostly underused, except for like these really spiky moments.


So what would it look like to actually have a network that is fully utilised and beaming photons on fibre the whole time and maximising bandwidth utilisation? That looks like having signatures being aggregated at different levels.


So there's topologies that we can talk about, there's hierarchies that I'm happy to go into, there's different levels. But you can imagine leaf signatures being sent by validators being aggregated in different points in the network, and then further recursively aggregated in higher points. And this is flowing constantly. This is happening constantly, and it's revolving.


So new signatures, kind of like stronger signatures that aggregate more leaf signatures are being constantly emitted at different points in the network, and then kind of like aggregated in a cycle. So having a topology like that is kind of what I think would be a good design space for us to shoot for.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (21:20 - 21:40)


Let me see if I understand what's happening here. Let's say we have 1000 signatures, we want to aggregate them. One way to do this is send all 1000s to one person, and this person can aggregate and tell us this was the aggregate signature.


But you're saying there's other ways of doing it, right? Like other topologies and subnets as a way of dividing these people and these signatures?


[Raúl Kripalani] (21:40 - 22:30)


Subnets are a way of sharding the work that needs to happen. So you then assign validators or nodes to different subnets, and you're parallelising within those subnets, there's activity happening, and then you have a role within that subnet or with some redundancy, which could be the aggregator. This is how the network works today.


And these nodes would be in charge of collecting all the signatures and then escalating a aggregate. And this could happen over multiple levels.


The issue with that approach is that you're introducing latency along the critical path. So then that is where the pipelining aspect comes in. Can you already start doing work before you have finished the end-to-end?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (22:30 - 22:38)


So is this the main trick that goes behind dealing with these bigger signatures? Or is there more to it?


[Raúl Kripalani] (22:38 - 23:19)


It's one aspect. I think there are structured topologies that we're looking at. So there was research around grid topologies that would then create a deterministic routing approach, where you would be having at maximum two hubs between any validator and any other validator that needs to receive signatures.


Anything that nominates a specific node to be a role in the network then needs redundancy as well, because you can't just have... for many reasons, you can't just have a single node be responsible for like a subsection of the network because, you know, security concerns.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (23:19 - 23:21)


I mean, if that node goes down, then the thing goes down, right?


[Raúl Kripalani] (23:21 - 24:05)


Exactly. Yeah. But then there's another element here, which is you don't want... even if you have redundancy at that level, which is what we have today, you also don't want those nodes, ideally, to reveal who they are, because then they become points of attack.


If data needs to flow through them, they would potentially be choke points in the network and that would be target for attack.


So you don't want to reveal who they are. That gives higher security, but at the same time creates inefficiencies because it would be great if you could just send your signatures to a set of nodes in the network and you know who they are.


So there's kind of different designs that we're considering there.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (24:05 - 24:19)


So is there a co-design happening between the cryptography, sort of the signature and the aggregation teams, and the DevNet team? And if there is a co-design, Will, is it essentially down to you to make sure they talk to each other and work correctly?


[Will Corcoran] (24:20 - 27:49)


Well, I don't know about down to me. I don't know. There's the saying like, influence without authority.


And so really it's just a matter of being consistent and showing up and letting people sort of know what the expectations are.


And so with that in mind, the weekly calls are structured to sort of allow for all of this activity. And so you can look at the call agenda and you can think about it. It helps kind of you understand how this works.


So we start off with the client updates. And so the clients are always consistently working on completing... becoming spec complete with the current DevNet.


But then there's the previous DevNet, which we take from being a local DevNet. It would be in a long running DevNet. So there might be some efforts involved in that.


And then there's the, if that's DevNet in, DevNet in minus one, and then DevNet in plus one would be kind of in the research and specification phase.


And so there's going to, you know, looking ahead, there's going to be, you know, further down the agenda after we get through client updates, then you get into like the researcher and specification updates. And so that's where you get into the more of the open discussion.


And you've got people like Dmitry and Benedikt coming in and providing updates on cryptographic primitives. You got Thomas talking about the specification and leanMultisig along with Emile talking about LeanVM.


And so that like helps set the stage for the upcoming... like what's the next set of features going to be that we're striving for. And then also answering any questions that people are having on the implementation phase.


And then beyond that, we also have similar to a lot of Raúl's work, like, okay, you need to be able to measure this and have observability. So we've got something called leanMetrics. Katya has been really instrumental in leading that.


And so this is the idea of having like client agnostic metrics. And so we have our own local DevNet environment that we've built called leanQuickstart.


We run these DevNets, but then you also have to have like key metrics that you're looking at across all those different implementations because 10 teams are writing these and I don't know, probably like five or six different languages represented. They have different optimisations.


And so you want to understand, okay, how to like the core signature aggregation or signature generation, signing, all these sort of activities, what type of performance and latency are you seeing across the different network or implementations?


And then how are they networking together, reaching finality, and staying in sync?


And so you have to be able to measure that. And so that's another point where not necessarily network design, but the tools of the trade and looking at simulations and observability come into play because as Raúl mentioned with EIP-7870, I think it is the bandwidth and hardware constraints, like all of this is not being done in a vacuum. There's... everything is resource constrained and like, it's all about resource optimisation.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (27:49 - 28:14)


So actually metrics is a really good point that I forgot to ask Raúl about because it's something I asked in previous episodes as well, like Thomas and Emile, I was asking, what are the metrics you care about with your VM and how are you doing on those metrics?


So with them, it was, how many signatures can I aggregate per second? With a network, what do we look at? What do we care about? And how are we doing like in the current stage of development?


[Raúl Kripalani] (28:15 - 28:39)


Yeah, right. So some metrics are... so we have the notion of throughput, which is how many bytes can we move on the wire. But then the one that we really care about is goodput, which is how many actual application useful bytes are capable of being transmitted and on kind of the critical path.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (28:39 - 28:44)


So is this how many of the signatures can I move around or is that too oversimplifying?


[Raúl Kripalani] (28:45 - 31:06)


Assuming that the client can aggregate at an infinite speed, right? And potentially can produce an avalanche of signatures if there's kind of a multi-validator client or aggregates if it's participating as an aggregator, then assuming it's infinite, it's an infinite stream, how much is the network being able to transport through the critical path?


And one... and kind of like within this, a sub metric is how many duplicates I have.


So how much redundancy, like what is my efficiency factor? Because remember, this is a decentralised network and it is not a permissioned network. It is unpermissioned, unlike other chains, which can apply many optimisations and many tricks.


If you permission at the networking layer and you know who your validators are, your allowed participants, you know their endpoints. And then, of course, because these networks secure capital, you need to make sure that you deploy all of the infrastructure to prevent DDoS attacks and to prevent all kinds of attacks if you're going to be revealing what your endpoints are.


And the fact that there's critical validators or nodes running behind those endpoints, we don't get to do all of that, right?


We are a decentralised network. You can come in, you can read the network, you can participate in the network if you have consensus duties, right? So we don't get to do all of that.


So how do we provide the security? e do it through different redundancy paths. So it could be physical redundancy in the sense that you have multiple nodes taking... sorry, you send a piece of data to multiple parties.


It could be through information redundancy. So this is where erasure coding, for example, comes in. And one of the key primitives that we're looking at is erasure coded broadcast.


So I think those are the key. There's many more. Of course, you have the topology optimality.


So if you're going to be building a topology, you can take different measurements of that topology, and then over time, you can measure, is this the optimal routing? Is this arriving to the optimal routing decisions and paths for data as it moves around the network?


There's many more.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (31:06 - 31:21)


Is there also a notion of finality? We said we want signatures to propagate, to be aggregated, and everyone to agree on what the block was. Is this part of the metrics for the network, or is that actually a higher level in the stack?


[Will Corcoran] (31:21 - 31:47)


I mean, just basically getting the clients to be able to sync up and maintain a consistent head of the chain and reach finality is a key part of being able to generate and disseminate these signatures in a timely manner that allows for the rest of the gears to be able to keep working as intended.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (31:48 - 31:53)


And so what goals are we trying to look at and how far are we from them, or how close?


[Will Corcoran] (31:53 - 34:23)


Well, I think as Raúl mentioned, we're... within the context of the PQ Interop and leanConsensus, we're working with this proxy of 3sf-mini.


So we know aspirationally that Ethereum wants to move towards faster finality beyond the 2-epoch finality that Raúl mentioned to 3-slot finality. And we know that we also want to have shorter slots for better UX.


Knowing that that's aspirationally in the direction that we're going, but the research isn't totally done, Vitalik actually wrote up a very small proof of concept version of 3-slot finality. It's called 3sf-mini. And so that's what we're using as a proxy right now within leanEthereum.


And so we're using 3sf-mini and 4-second slots, but we also know that the protocol consensus team is doing a lot of research right now around fast finality and fast finality end game.


And so I guess back to coordination and some of the things that get me excited are being able to work across disciplines and plan this next group of IRL meetups that we have in Cannes. We're calling it Fort Mode and Beast Mode.


So we'll actually have all the cryptographers, the client teams, Raúl talking about Eth P2P, we'll have [?] Jan there talking about fast finality, and they'll have an opportunity to really set the stage of okay, what could the client teams be working on that helps us move the ball forward for the next 6 months in terms of being able to choreograph all of these signatures and attestations and aggregation in a way that's consistent directionally with where research is going.


And then that takes us 6 months out to where we're already planning the next Cambridge Get Together where we'll have all of these researchers back together.


So we try to strategically think about these 6 month separated meetups that allow for a lot of serendipity, but a lot of research to come out of it.


And it's also a great forcing function because people want to present new things and demonstrate new things at those meetups.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (34:23 - 34:32)


You mentioned Raúl is going to present Eth P2P. Is this what we've been talking about so far? Or have we missed the mark and there's a whole thing that we've missed completely?


[Raúl Kripalani] (34:32 - 34:35)


The DevNets are actually using libp2p today and they're using kind of like a...


[Nico Mohnblatt] (34:35 - 34:36)


What is libp2p? Sorry.


[Raúl Kripalani] (34:36 - 35:54)


So libp2p is the networking stack that powers mainnet today. And it uses Gossipsub as the propagation technique. And it uses a multi-transport approach that has QUIC and TCP. But it wasn't purpose-built for Ethereum.


So libp2p is a very useful library. It is that aims to kind of like be a general library, very composable and modular, where you can kind of stitch together exactly the discovery mechanisms and the Gossip mechanisms and the transports that a particular application is going to be using.


But it wasn't built with Ethereum in mind and the needs of the Ethereum protocol.


So at this point, we're looking at Eth P2P, which is the next generation networking stack for Ethereum that has been specifically built and optimised for the network workloads that Ethereum puts on the wire.


So this is kind of like the substrate that we'll be kind of transplanting the DevNets to as it becomes available.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (35:54 - 35:57)


Is this sort of the topology and subnets we were talking about earlier?


[Raúl Kripalani] (35:58 - 37:19)


Yeah. So the topologies would be built on Eth P2P and Eth P2P would provide kind of constructions to create those topologies. 


So one of the key building blocks that we're looking to release very soon is the broadcast layer. So right now, DevNets are using Gossipsub, which is a store and forward mechanism, which means that data is being propagated through the network and as a node receives it, it is going to validate it and then it's going to queue it up for the next nodes to kind of like fan it out and continue propagating it on the network.


But it needs to receive the entire message before it can do anything with it.


So this is one of those inefficiencies that we aim to solve with Eth P2P, where basically for larger payloads, we divide a message into smaller chunks, we erasure code them and then disseminate them on the network through parallel paths so that each node is receiving chunks in parallel and is reconstituting the payload. And if any of these chunks goes missing, we have applied an erasure code to it, which means that...


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:19 - 37:19)


You can recompute it.


[Raúl Kripalani] (37:20 - 37:48)


Exactly. As soon as you receive enough chunks, you can recompute it.


And this is a technique that's very useful for larger payloads, which aggregates are going to be, but it does not help with individual leaf signatures. So there's a scheduling aspect here and there is kind of like a control plane here.


So right now we have different objects moving in the Ethereum network and we have the EL and we have the CL and they're both like...


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:48 - 37:49)


Execution and consensus layers.


[Raúl Kripalani] (37:50 - 38:24)


Exactly. Yeah, sorry.


So they're both competing for the same bandwidth.


So with Eth P2P, we aim to introduce a control plane where you have a strict orchestration of what is prioritised at each point in time so that the critical path can be optimised.


And there's a lot more. There's like improvements on the transport layer, where we've been using QUIC as a primary transport layer with 0-RTT and a lot more. I can go into depth.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:24 - 38:28)


So I guess people should go and see your talk in Cannes, right?


[Raúl Kripalani] (38:28 - 38:31)


Yeah, that's a good pointer.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:31 - 38:58)


Well, guys, thank you very much for coming on the show. It was great to talk about how we are coordinating machines on a network and also how we're coordinating humans, building a way to coordinate machines on a network.


So thank you both for coming. It was really fun.


[Will Corcoran] (38:45 - 38:46)


Thanks for having us.


[Raúl Kripalani] (38:46 - 38:47)


Yeah, thanks for having us.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:47 - 38:58)


I also want to thank the podcast team, Anna, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Hector.


To those of you catching us in video, thanks for watching. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.