[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 1:58)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online. This week, I am joined by Guillermo, Nico, and Tarun for a co-host reunion.


This is episode 399, and in it we take the time to share how each of my co-hosts first joined the show, and how the show and the ZK scene around it has changed along the way. In this episode, we try to answer a question that has the community split. And that is, is ZK dead, or has it just begun?


We explore how ZK has shifted from deep, obscure research, to a buzzword attracting VC funding, to now something closer to foundational infrastructure, more widely deployed than ever, and yet less attractive to those who are deploying capital. We cover the evolving landscape of ZK companies, the crazy expansion in new applications for ZK tech, and the growing trend of teams using ZK as an implicit primitive rather than a headline feature. We then stumbled into a chat about the intersection of ZK and AI today, as well as what could be possible.


We ran out of time before we could get into one of the major topics of the moment in the ZK space. That is the return to the privacy narrative, so we'll need to explore that very soon in a future episode. But in the meantime, here's our 399th episode with my co-hosts, Guillermo, Nico, and Tarun.


Today, I'm joined by most of my co-hosts, Guillermo, Nico, Tarun. Hey, everybody.


[Co-hosts] (1:59 - 2:01)
What's up? Hello. Hello.


Yo.


[Anna Rose] (2:01 - 2:22)
We are missing Kobi for this one. Kobi, we miss you. We hope to have you on very, very soon.


But just in terms of scheduling, this is kind of how it worked out. One of the reasons I wanted to do this episode now is that we are actually going to be releasing this as episode 399. So I do have a special guest for episode 400.


[Guillermo Angeris] (2:22 - 2:23)
That's crazy, bro.


[Anna Rose] (2:24 - 2:51)
Yeah. But I wanted to do this just kind of in the lead up to that. We're getting close to a milestone with the show.


It feels kind of strange to say 400. Obviously this isn't the big 500, which we'll have to do something really crazy for that. But yeah, 400 episodes of the Zero Knowledge podcast.


It's been running since like mid-late 2017. Really started in 2018. So that means eight years.


Wow.


[Nico] (2:52 - 2:52)
Damn.


[Anna Rose] (2:52 - 3:23)
I think maybe as a starting point, a lot of folks do know you all and know you from the ZK scene, know you from the ZK space, know you from the show, maybe know you from other shows that you're on sometimes, from the research that you release. But we were just talking about how each of you first came on the show or first got to know me. And actually, I think each of you have been guests before, definitely before you were hosts.


So let's talk a little bit about that chain, because there is kind of a connection between the three of you. The first is Tarun.


[Tarun] (3:23 - 3:32)
Yeah, I think my first episode was probably like around seven years. It was like early 2019. And I kind of feel like it was like March or April.


[Anna Rose] (3:33 - 3:53)
Yeah, it was definitely the beginning. What's so funny is at the time, I felt like the show was already kind of established, like it was already a thing. But now I'm like, it was only around for a year.


Do you remember what episode it was? I could find it out. So it was the first time I met Tarun was actually this interview.


So it was the first picture like we log on, we meet Tarun.


[Tarun] (3:53 - 3:57)
It was January 30th, 2019. Oh, wow.


[Anna Rose] (3:58 - 3:58)
Wow.


[Guillermo Angeris] (3:59 - 4:00)
That is old school cool now.


[Anna Rose] (4:00 - 4:02)
That's crazy. So it's seven years ago.


[Tarun] (4:02 - 4:02)
Yeah.


[Guillermo Angeris] 
What did you even talk about?


[Anna Rose] (4:02 - 4:11)
So we talked about you had you had sort of initial ideas for Gauntlet, but I don't even know if you like did you had you already founded Gauntlet at that point?


[Tarun (4:11 - 4:29)
Yeah, but I think it was more about like the like how you model these systems because we were talking about like you had a bunch of people who were talking about consensus protocols. Right. And like I think the early days of the ZK podcast had more consensus and L1 stuff than ZK.


Right. Like probably the first year.


[Anna Rose] (4:29 - 4:31)
Two years. Two years. 2019.


[Nico] (4:31 - 4:32)
There was no ZK. Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (4:32 - 4:37)
There was only a couple episodes that we could actually focus on ZK because there were so few projects doing that.


[Tarun] (4:37 - 4:46)
Right. Right. So it was just a different era.


Right. Like, remember, this is like there's no L1 other than Ethereum and like that has any usage like at that time. Right.


[Anna Rose] (4:47 - 4:55)
And the only ZK project that was live at the time, I think, was Zcash. And maybe it's like sort of Forks or like kind of similar project to Zcash.


[Tarun] (4:55 - 4:56)
Tornado was very close to them.


[Anna Rose] (4:57 - 4:58)
I think. Wasn't that more like a 2020?


[Tarun] (4:59 - 5:00)
Maybe it's later. I think you're right.


[Anna Rose] (5:00 - 5:00)
Yeah.


[Tarun] (5:00 - 5:05)
Yeah. Tornado was later. You're right.


OK. Yeah. I think you're right.


It's basically Zcash. I don't know what else.


[Anna Rose] (5:05 - 5:13)
That was the only live thing. There were other like, you know, founding project things. ZK Sync was probably already around.


O1 Labs was already around.


[Tarun] (5:13 - 5:15)
Yeah. O1 Labs and Starkware definitely were.


[Anna Rose] (5:16 - 5:19)
Exactly. But they were not live. They were far from coming out.


[Guillermo Angeris] (5:20 - 5:26)
And yet, after all of that, after this man ranted to you about like Proof of Stake or whatever for an hour, you were like, oh, this guy would make a great co-host.


[Anna Rose] (5:27 - 5:44)
Well, we didn't we didn't know that then. I actually I'm going to link to that episode because it wasn't just that. I think we also, Tarun, did like a background on you, which a lot of folks who know you from at least this show may not know your background.


We talked about I think we talked about your Ph.D. on Glass.


[Tarun] (5:44 - 5:50)
Oh, yeah. Like working, working at D. E. Shaw. Yeah.


Yeah. That's where I met Guillermo. 
[Guillermo Angeris] (5:50 - 5:53)
Actually, he was my boss at  D. E. Shaw Research way back in the day.


[Anna Rose] (5:54 - 6:41)
Yeah. Yeah. So then Tarun and I, I think you and I became kind of friends from the conference circuit.


We started to talk more just about other topics. And at the time that Frederick started to step away from the show. So Frederick, for those who don't know, was my initial co-host back in the day.


He and I started the show together. We did three years, always having really the two of us on the show. And then I think in the last year, he had a family and was starting to fade away a little bit from the show itself.


And Tarun, you started to guest host. So that was kind of the testing ground. And then once Frederick left, we actually brought you on as a as a co-host.


That's how I remember it, at least. I see. And Guillermo, you were the next kind of guest.


And Tarun was the person who brought you on.


[Guillermo Angeris] (6:42 - 6:44)
Yeah, I was next in the line of Kin, you know.


[Anna Rose] (6:44 - 6:46)
Yeah. He was like, you got to meet this guy, Guillermo.


[Tarun] (6:46 - 6:47)
Host chain.


[Anna Rose] (6:47 - 6:48)
We're working on this.


[Tarun] (6:48 - 6:59)
We just need it. We just need a token called host chain. And you're only allowed to do it if you're you're only you only are allowed to like mint if you are if you're one of the hosts.


You descend from one of from one of us. Yeah, I see. I see.


[Anna Rose] (7:00 - 7:04)
OK, so Guillermo, the work we had you on for the first time was?


[Guillermo Angeris] (7:05 - 7:35)
I think if I recall correctly, it was privacy and DeFi. Tarun and I had just written a sequence of papers showing I think it was what I call folk theorem at the time. It wasn't possible to do kind of private trading by putting ZK on top of Uniswap.


This is back when Uniswap was like really popping and everyone was like, oh, my God, you know, everyone's in all the trades or whatever. And essentially that work showed that you couldn't do it as it stood, if I recall correctly. And we talked a little bit about just stuff, including like what the hell I was doing for the PhD, which I think I was in at the time.


I don't recall. 


[Tarun] (7:35 - 7:47)
Didn't you? Didn't you leave?


Because like that was probably 2021, right? So you graduated at the end of the year. Yeah, 21.


And I finished it in early 22.


[Anna Rose] (7:48 - 7:55)
And I remember that recording. I think, Tarun, that was the one we did in person when we both were living or like staying in Texas.


[Guillermo Angeris] (7:55 - 7:59)
Oh, in Austin, Texas for that like eight weeks in 2021.


[Anna Rose] (7:59 - 8:02)
It was like the only time Tarun and I lived in the same city, kind of lived.


[Tarun] (8:02 - 8:04)
No one lived anywhere, though.


[Anna Rose] (8:04 - 8:15)
Yeah, no one lived anywhere at the time, but it was such a fun, such a fun moment that there was like a couple of people who had like found their way there. Anyway, yeah, Guillermo, you were on a call, but Tarun and I were in person.


[Tarun] (8:15 - 8:19)
But there's some irony to this because Guillermo's from around there. Yes. His like family.


[Anna Rose] (8:19 - 8:20)
But he was not there.


[Tarun] (8:20 - 8:35)
But he grew up around there. Yeah, yeah, exactly. But I was not there.


[Guillermo]
I was in like California or whatever. And then you guys are freezing your arses off. I think that was like during the crazy snowstorm, right?


There had been a snowstorm. That's wild. That's actually crazy to think about.


[Tarun] 
Man, I feel so old thinking about that. I'm like, that was five years ago.


[Anna Rose] (8:35 - 8:36)
Five years ago?


[Tarun] (8:36 - 8:38)
That was five years ago, dude. Weird.


[Anna Rose] (8:39 - 8:40)
Half a decade.


[Tarun] (8:40 - 8:52)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Sorry. It doesn't feel like that.


Not to continue to make everyone feel old, but I was like, no, that's fucking, that's a long time. In crypto years, that's like 25% of the industry lifetime, right? Basically.


[Anna Rose] (8:53 - 8:58)
Okay, then, Guillermo, you didn't really bring on Nico. Nico, I met you.


[Nico] (8:58 - 8:58)
No, we don't.


[Anna Rose] (8:58 - 9:08)
We met you separately. We knew you before you actually came on the show. But when you came on the show, we just talked about this before, it was 2023, right around ZK Summit.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (9:08 - 9:09)
It was ZK Summit in Lisbon.


[Anna Rose] (9:09 - 9:11)
Nine? Yeah. And ZK Hack in Lisbon.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (9:11 - 9:13)
And ZK Hack. Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (9:13 - 9:21)
So it was that crazy week put on by myself and the team, and we burned ourselves out doing it, but it was a lot of fun. Very memorable.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (9:21 - 9:28)
But halfway in that week, we took the time to sit around and have a nice discussion, the three of us on the show. It was really good fun.


[Anna Rose] (9:28 - 9:38)
And that was Guillermo as the co-host, Guillermo and Nico kind of both on the show, passing the torch-ish. Sharing the torch.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (9:38 - 9:45)
The chain continues. By the way, along the chain, I'm guessing Kobi would have showed up before I did, right? Yeah, where is Kobi in a host chain?


Kobi and I are a fork.


[Anna Rose] (9:45 - 9:54)
Yeah, Kobi came. Yeah, so Kobi came. He was a guest.


I don't remember. I think it was when he was at Kedit. So a really long time ago.


[Tarun] (9:54 - 9:55)
Oh my God, I forgot he was there.


[Anna Rose] (9:55 - 9:58)
Yeah. Yeah, yeah. Let me try to find that one.


[Tarun] (9:58 - 10:00)
No, no. Wasn't he at Celo then? That was when he was like contracting.


[Anna Rose] (10:00 - 10:03)
That was before. Before that? So it was before Celo.


[Guillermo Angeris] (10:03 - 10:03)
Holy shit.


[Anna Rose] (10:04 - 10:11)
Oh, but wait, maybe, I think just looking at this, I think he actually maybe already was at Celo by the time we had him on the show, but I think I met him.


[Tarun] (10:11 - 10:32)
I just kind of remember like he and Georgios were just kind of these like free agents constantly moving between these projects at that time, right? Good engineers. Well, I feel like at that time, everyone was like, ZK engineer, like crazy, you know, whatever, right?


Whereas like now, I feel like it's like flipped. There's like too many of them or something.


[Anna Rose] (10:33 - 10:43)
Well, OK, so that's a little bit the story of us and sort of like there's a little bit of a history of the show weaved into what we shared there. 


[Guillermo Angeris] (10:43 - 10:47)
I'll say that the family tree, right?
It's like Tarun is the grandfather of Niko. I don't know.


[Speaker 4] (10:47 - 10:47)
I don't know.


[Guillermo Angeris] (10:47 - 10:56)
Like the great grandmother of Niko. I think it's like there's a cycle there because it's like it's like Kobi also is probably a Niko parent implicitly. Oh, Niko.


[Guillermo] (10:56 - 10:56)
Yeah. It's true.


[Anna Rose] (10:57 - 11:01)
It's possible that it's possible that Kobi brought Niko more into the fold early.


[Guillermo Angeris] (11:01 - 11:03)
It's true. Yeah. Yeah.


Maybe.


[Anna Rose] (11:03 - 11:04)
Nico, how did we meet? When did we meet?


[Tarun] (11:04 - 11:07)
The question is like, do we have any like directed cycles or not?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:09 - 11:14)
When did we meet? We met in person at a London meetup, actually a ZK Hack meetup.


[Anna Rose] (11:15 - 11:15)
Oh, wow.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:16 - 11:33)
Yeah. And towards the end of the event, you were, I think, preparing the application form for that ZK Summit in Lisbon. OK.


And you sort of opened the floor of like, do you guys have any good questions that we can ask? And that's how we started chatting. You know, like the famous question in like the ZK Hack application.


Oh, sorry. The ZK Summit application.


[Anna Rose] (11:33 - 11:36)
And with Mary. And we were sitting, I remember we were sitting around a fireplace.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:37 - 11:37)
Yep. Correct.


[Anna Rose] (11:37 - 11:38)
Cool.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:38 - 11:39)
Correct.


[Anna Rose] (11:39 - 11:54)
And I was like, what's the question we should ask for this year's application for ZK Summit? And I don't remember which one it was, but I remember, yeah, there was about six people that I was kind of pinging ideas off of. Did yours get it?


Did you? Was it yours?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:54 - 11:56)
I think yes. It was vanishing polynomial. Vanishing polynomial.


Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (11:56 - 11:57)
Nice.


[Guillermo Angeris] (11:57 - 11:58)
Oh, OK.


[Anna Rose] (11:58 - 13:29)
Wow. That's interesting. OK.


So, yeah, we are, you know, this is where we're at as a show. I feel like it's been a crazy ride. And you're right, Tarun, you were sort of talking about like the early era when there was very little ZK.


I mean, you know that it started as a blockchain, just figuring out blockchain podcast. It was like the first episodes, we just say, welcome to this podcast. Eventually, it became the ZK podcast, but like, ironically, and then eventually it became the ZK podcast once we had enough.


But for real, for real. Stuff. And, you know, Nico and I have been doing this sort of history of ZK research, the intros for ZK Summit.


Before that, I had done this map of ZK with like this explosion of companies. And I think I presented that in 2024. Now we're in 2026 and the landscape has changed again.


Maybe not in the direction we had all hoped for the ecosystem, for the businesses. But on the research front, it has continued to kind of branch out, explode, become more relevant, become more adopted into, you know, what I would call almost like more like mainstream research groups. So it's a funny moment in ZK.


Before this episode, Tarun, you and I were sort of texting, and I think, I don't know if I asked you or you asked me, but one of us was like, is ZK dead? Because from where you're sitting, is ZK dead?


[Tarun] (13:29 - 13:57)
I think it's dead from the decentralised systems usage. That's what I will say. I think like non-decentralised systems usage, like the Google paper that posted a ZKP of the circuit they had, like that type of stuff, I bet you will actually be where you see the next growth.


I think the blockchain usage is just more that it's not really like financial. It's like a feature. It's fundamentally a feature for a blockchain, not like a product for a blockchain, right?


[Anna Rose] (13:57 - 14:11)
And yet you do have like Ethereum that's like reworking a lot of their system to be around like using all the ZK, I mean, features, yes, but like it's supposed to underpin in a way the system. Nico, you just did this series on Lean Ethereum.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (14:12 - 14:12)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (14:13 - 14:14)
I don't know if you want to weigh in.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (14:14 - 15:01)
Yeah, absolutely. No, I think even actually around Lisbon, there was this thesis starting to emerge of the end goal for ZK is to be boring in the same way like HTTPS, like encryption is boring. And that's almost where we are now, or like we're kind of getting there.


Like the research, it used to be like, okay, we have Growth16. Can we implement it? Can we make it practical?


Now we have a bunch of different options. A lot of them very practical. So it's no longer that you need a huge team of researchers and engineers to do ZK.


You can just get like a few people and that's it. So in that sense, yeah, as a dead no, but dead in like the effervescent energy of like, can we make this work? Yeah, that's maybe gone.


Because we can. It's like we had research and we found, you know, we found.


[Anna Rose] (15:02 - 15:46)
Although it's funny because like, you know, we're doing ZK Mesh every month and we do State of ZK every quarter, but ZK Mesh, it's a good sort of, you know, I'm checking all of these research sites and seeing what kind of stuff is coming out around ZK and it's a lot still. I mean, Nico, you're helping me with that. So you see it too, like the full list of projects that are like of papers that are coming out that mention or reference or all about ZK, it's a lot.


It's, I think we, we actually checked. It's like over 700 a year or something like that, that, you know, and we are going through it and we're picking out about 15 to 20 per month that seem more relevant. That's what we're doing for ZK Mesh, the newsletter that comes out every month.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (15:46 - 16:02)
So in the same way, like ZK became boring for companies, it's not like a cool new feature. It became attractive for academics because now, you know, like this thing is real and this thing exists. So you can go ahead and write papers about it because it's interesting to the real world.


It's cool now, you know?


[Guillermo] (16:02 - 16:02)
Yeah.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (16:03 - 16:05)
Yeah. So you have almost like this, this reverse thing.


[Anna Rose] (16:06 - 16:38)
It does also seem though, like, yeah, when you're looking at those papers, there are some breakthroughs. I think on the lattice front, we still see some breakthroughs. Very underexplored.


I think the use within, like, it's almost like the techniques that have been pioneered through some of the work in the ZK space seem to now be used in other math spaces. We've seen it in FHE. We've seen it in MPC.


We've seen, I feel like, and actually, correct me if I'm wrong here, but in the quantum work, yes, there was a ZKP that proved something about the quantum work. But is there also some of the techniques of ZK being used under the hood?


[Tarun] (16:38 - 16:54)
I would say the following, conceptually, there's a lot of overlap, right? Like in the sense that like quantum computing historically has been not about optimising implementations in the same way as ZK from, you know, the early 90s to 2012 or something, right? Like, probably.


[Anna Rose] (16:54 - 16:55)
It was just theoretical.


[Tarun] (16:55 - 18:18)
Gentry, whatever. Well, it wasn't just theoretical. Like, there were like, people had implemented ZKPs that were just very for very tiny things like adding two numbers or like doing some like kind of simple, you know, like proof of concept, not something you could like compile arbitrary code to or like, you know, like no one had done that step of how do we go from like this theoretical thing that we also have a proof of concept for, but the proof of concept is so inefficient, it's like useless to, oh, actually, here's this research for scaling it and making it more efficient so that you can use it for arbitrary things.


And I think quantum computing has had has taken a lot longer to make that same jump because like everything has just been focused on making the system stable at all, rather than like, how do we optimise implementations so that they're doing bigger, more real things. Now, I mean, I think the natural place where there's like overlap, when I say conceptually, I do mean conceptually, not necessarily mathematically, is like, how error correcting codes are used and like what error correction does to scalability, right? Like, that seems to be the one thing that's fundamental to a lot of, you know, the quantum codes are very different.


Like, I'm not saying they're the same, but they have certain different properties. But there's sort of clearly been, that's where the advances for both of these systems has come from, like error correcting. Obviously, this is like, I'm saying this at a very high level, you know, Guillermo can put me in the guillotine, so to speak, if he needs to.


[Anna Rose] (18:19 - 18:34)
I have a question when this is going to take a different direction. We I think it was on the IO episode, Tarun. We talked about like Learning With Errors.


Is that Error Correcting as well? Are they related, completely unrelated?


[GTarun] (18:34 - 19:41)
They're not unrelated in some way. But they're like learning with errors is more like a threat model. It's like if someone can, in the same way, right, like in RSA, you're like, if I can factor, you break the model.


Learning with errors is a certain math problem that's like, take a bunch of simple equations, add a bunch of errors, noise to them. And if you can still invert the answer, then that's sort of a, that's like the factoring thing. And so learning with errors is more like the assumption you use to base security on.


It just happens to be that LWE is an assumption in quantum algorithms and in IO and in a lot of places. And sometimes, not always. And so people who are much deeper than me on this, because I just haven't really also kept out the literature, so don't shoot me for the over speaking.


But sometimes a lot of the error correction type of things are built around LWE. Like you know, you show if you have LWE, then like this error correction thing can't get broken or it doesn't introduce too many errors or stuff like that. So there is some relation, but it's not direct at all, if that makes sense.


[Anna Rose] (19:41 - 19:44)
And error correcting codes are?


[Tarun] (19:44 - 19:57)
Guillermo should, you know, he's the one who's written more papers on it than anyone else on this call. 

[Guillermo Angeris] 
So yeah, like the learning with errors actually originally comes from like, like error correcting codes originally, I think, like as a problem.


[Anna] (19:57 - 19:57)
Okay.


[Guillermo Angeris] (19:58 - 20:32)
And it was, learning with errors is one of the weird, very special cases of problems. It's one of the weird cases where we know that if you're able to solve, kind of on average, this problem, you can, it's actually like solving the problem on average, at least as hard as solving it in the hardest case, which is a very weird particular property. And like, it kind of gives some credence to the idea that this problem is actually hard in a cryptographic sense.


Yeah. And it comes from the error correcting code literature, because the idea is you kind of want to invert something that has enough errors that like it makes it very, very difficult to figure out what the original thing was.


[Anna Rose] (20:32 - 20:47)
But error correcting, isn't that more like sampling? I think actually I was told, don't call it sampling, that's wrong. But in my head, it still sort of falls in a little bit of that example where you're like trying to, you're trying to like gauge what something looks like.


[Guillermo Angeris] (20:47 - 21:15)
Error correcting codes are this idea that we use a lot both in succinct proofs, also in quantum computing. And in fact, actually, we even use it in, in memory. So like your computer actually uses error correcting codes for like memory corruption prevention.


And the idea is very simple. You take a message, right? And then you essentially blow it up in such a way, such that if you take this blown up thing, you switch a few bits around, you can always recover the original message.


[Anna Rose] (21:15 - 21:15)
Okay.


[Guillermo Angeris] (21:15 - 22:30)
At least in a theoretical sense, recover it. I mean, you need not be like efficiently recoverable or all sorts of stuff. So you might ask, okay, why does that work for succinct proofs, right?


Like FRI or stuff like why is that useful is because in some sense, the adversary, if the adversary messes with only a small number of, you know, entries in this big, long message or this big, long vector or whatever, they can't do any like that. That doesn't like affect the underlying message that you're trying to send over the channel. Why does it work in quantum computing?


Well, in quantum computing, you have this problem of like, you have a bunch of qubits, right? And they're not perfectly reliable. So they're like only, you know, they have some notion of reliability.


Someone like 99 to 99 point something, 99.7, I think is like some threshold or whatever. And the idea is essentially you want to compute something. But if you only know like, you know, every three out of a thousand times something screws up, you don't want to screw up the entire calculation.


You want to screw up in such a way that you can always recover what you wanted. And so that's like error correcting codes are used to essentially take a calculation, blow it up slightly in such a way that if you have a small number of errors in the calculation, you're actually good. Like it actually doesn't matter because you can always back out what you wanted originally.


[Anna Rose] (22:30 - 22:36)
This is why it's also used in memory, I guess, because there is sort of imperfections, but you can still get the data correct enough.


[Guillermo Angeris] (22:37 - 22:56)
Yeah. So, you know, as you make memory, like memory, as you make it smaller and smaller and smaller, you have a higher error rate. And so you do a thing where essentially you take your data, you make it a little bit bigger.


But if a few bits are screwed up, it's totally fine because you can always recover it originally. But it also shows up actually in all sorts of crazy shit like mathematics.


[Anna Rose] (22:56 - 23:14)
Didn't it? It was. I mean, it was also in our show.


I think we talked about this, correct me if I'm wrong, but I think like Celestia had something, data availability, and then also Eigenlayer had something to do with this as well. So it's like very different places this topic has come up.


[Guillermo Angeris] (23:15 - 24:27)
And it comes from data availability. You know, there's a number of papers, I think we've talked about them on the show, certainly Nico has definitely talked about it. We've done some work on this, which is like, how do you know that like, you know, somebody is not withholding data from you?


Well, you can like blow it up and then have a bunch of people look at little pieces of data. And if enough people look at enough little pieces of data, you are good. And why does that work?


Well, because if you have enough pieces of data, you can recover the original thing, even if somebody is trying to hide a small number of them from you. So it's all the same thing, right? It's like error correcting codes are this like very magical, very natural, but it's a very magical thing that exists out there.


And you can use it for all these like crazy applications, including quantum. And succinct proofs and ZK proofs and blah, blah, blah. 


[Tarun] 
But one thing to note, though, is, you know, Guillermo made this point of, you know, an error correcting code is like a way of I take a bunch of local samples and I learn some sort of structure globally.


The quantum error correcting codes are kind of different because there's not a clean notion of local there. So that's why I want to like, there is some nuance in this, but it's kind of like annoying to get at. 


[Guillermo]
Sorry.


This is specifically for the ZK notion of like how we use error correcting codes. Yeah. And the other stuff is like weird entanglement issues.


And it gets very, very fancy. And I don't want to get into that, but yeah.


[Anna Rose] (24:27 - 24:31)
We have some episodes where I think we did talk about that. We do talk about that.


[Guillermo] (24:31 - 24:31)
Indeed.


[Anna Rose] (24:31 - 24:41)
We'll try to track those down. Guillermo, I feel like we didn't get to ask you the question, is ZK dead? Just bringing it back.


[Guillermo Angeris] (24:41 - 25:16)
I think I agree with Nico and Tarun's assessment here. Like what's what's funny about it is the amount of people now using ZK is higher than ever. For sure.


In a very general sense. Like it's weird. This is like we see a lot of projects using it and all sorts of stuff.


But yeah, I think it's I think it's right. It's like your grandma's not asking like what programming language, you know, your bank account, you know, ledger software is written in there. And she's going to be asking like, what ZK proving system are you using for this?


Like that's that's when it's become a boring technology. And I think it's we're getting there, which is the point. And in some ways, very underwhelming.


[Anna Rose] (25:16 - 25:24)
I don't think we're entirely there because I don't think everything's battle tested. I think there are still vulnerabilities being found and I think 100% people still have to audit.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (25:24 - 25:26)
Absolutely. You are. Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (25:26 - 25:27)
You're working on that front nowadays.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (25:28 - 25:47)
Who would have been auditing these days? But yeah, that's actually from that assessment of a lot of the research, at least to get practical proofs has been done and we have practical proofs out there, then maybe it's time to go look at the security and battle hardening these things. And that's why also I'm where I am now.


[Anna Rose] (25:47 - 26:14)
Yeah. And I feel that, you know, yes, we are seeing ZK in more places, but have we seen it go as far as it can? I don't think so either.


Like I do. I have a sense that it's accelerating in terms of adoption in all these different ways. And I from from my perspective, I actually like that because this show is called Zero Knowledge.


It started as a blockchain podcast. It was then a consensus focused L1 like we're all all about, just...


[Tarun] (26:15 - 26:16)
You were working at an L1.


[Anna Rose] (26:16 - 27:50)
Yeah, I was working at infrastructure like the fact that I started as a deep infrastructure podcast as a totally non-technical person, which was silly. And then I went into cryptography as a totally not cryptography person, which is silly. But I don't know.


We've managed to swim through it to episode 399. So I guess something's working. But what I like about the fact that ZK keeps popping up in these different places is as this show, I mean, I can also explore those places.


Like if ZK appears like this past year, we did an episode on like AI watermarking or like you mentioned this kind of Google using ZK to prove something about code or something about research. I mean, this is an unusual case, but all of a sudden it's like then I can start to explore those things as well, which I think in the past felt far away from what we were working on. So, yeah, I sort of mentioned this in 2024.


We had this map of ZK, all the different projects that had launched. And you know, I think we had over 100 logos, I think, on that map. And there was another report that came out that had listed like 260 companies focused on ZK from four back in 2016 or whatever.


There was now over 200. In the last year, I mean, a lot of the teams that I've known and have had on the show have actually shut down or have switched focus or have, you know, launched a token that was a bit lacklustre. They're still around.


[Tarun] (27:50 - 27:54)
And they're taking some shots right there. 


[Guillermo Angeris] 
I know. Pew pew.


[Anna Rose] (27:54 - 28:28)
Well, I didn't list anybody. It's more, I mean, I think it's just been a tough year. And I think, you know, people who are going out also raising back in the day, you could mention ZK and it was easy to get funding.


I think the opposite is true now from what I've been hearing is it's harder to go out as a ZK project. You're going to want to pair that with something else that's exciting to VCs in order to get your funding. Yeah.


I'm just curious. Guillermo, Tarun, you live and breathe those spaces. Do you invest in ZK?


[Guillermo Angeris] (28:29 - 28:46)
Just a generic, wow, that's a very provocatively, you know, framed question. I mean, in the general sense, the answer is yes. But again, I think this goes back to the thing of like, there's not that much company formation in ZK today.


I mean, like no one's like, ah, like this is yet another like cool ZK L1 type of thing. Or it's pretty rare. I mean, maybe it exists.


[Anna Rose] (28:46 - 28:49)
Well, it does happen. I mean, we see them popping up still.


[Guillermo Angeris] (28:49 - 29:11)
Right. I just let's compare, you know, what it was to, you know, whatever, three years ago or four years ago. Right.


I think it's it's a different landscape for that. That being said, I feel like a lot of our companies and people we're seeing are using ZK far more as like a primitive that they can build stuff on identity, obviously being like at least one case, but, you know, all sorts of other similar like techniques.


[Anna Rose] (29:12 - 29:28)
Are you seeing more like of the traditional tech teams just pitching in general? And then like ZK is in there like has that happened yet where it's just sort of like not maybe not their front and centre product or technology, but it's sort of somewhere in the deck.


[Guillermo Angeris] (29:28 - 32:03)
So it's generally implicitly mentioned in a lot of cases for things like, how do you enable private payments? But nobody talks about ZK as the thing that enables it. They're just like, we can enable private payments.


Right. And, you know, the mechanics of it are a different story. I think that's a different problem.


But yeah. But how do you do that in a verifiable way? I think it's one question.


And there's kind of really only one way we really know how to do it that isn't trusting Intel or something. So so I have heard things of that nature more now, certainly than in the past, before it was like, you know, a bunch of nerds like us getting in a room and being like, oh, it's like, how do we do this thing? Well, it's like the ZK thing.


We got to do it. We got to put it on there. Once we do it, it'll work.


And that's how we do private payments, you know, or whatever. So that's that's my take on it. But who knows?


[Tarun]
I think it's just more like in a world of people not writing code by hand much anymore. ZK is just a library, an import call, a couple scripts. You know, it's not like a thing that you would even bother advertising as much as just like, oh, we use some advanced cryptography to make X private as opposed to saying what it is.


And I think the Web2 team's doing things that's like, that's more what they're saying. I think the other thing from a business standpoint about ZK companies versus like other types of like software companies, it's like, why are there so many database companies, right? Like, in theory, like, why do I need like a time series database and why can like there be a company that's supporting that when there's like five million free databases like that exist?


And a lot of that is like, well, these databases aren't really interoperable. There's no special there. They kind of don't have any.


There's a lot of lock-in once they have your data. It's like annoying to switch, whatever, right? The irony is like ZK as a lock-in technology, like to keep your customers is like zero because there's almost perfect interoperability in some ways.


Like I can move between these VMs and like, I don't have to think of that. And that perfect interoperability means there's no like value lock-in, you know, like, and that is the point of why it's useful in decentralised systems. But I think that's also the reason it's like not used.


It's like hard to make a business. I think it's just more that it's a technology where the thing itself is not a thing you advertise, right? Yeah, exactly.


And I think a few years ago, everyone was optimistic that it would be like that in the way that like in other blockchain contexts, like the technology is the thing you advertise. But here it's kind of not really. It's like a feature the user should never even know about fundamentally, like in a product.


[Anna Rose] (32:04 - 33:06)
But wouldn't you say that the entire like blockchain space moved away from advertising with its technology? Like everyone's talking about it becoming more product focused. You need an end user, you need benefit for the end user.


You're not really supposed to talk about the consensus protocols anymore. And it's actually been such an interesting journey to see like how teams marketed themselves over the years using technology as their, sometimes they're like their sales pitch. Sometimes the like opaqueness of technology to sort of like sprinkle magic dust in people's eyes.


Like you really saw both of those things happening over the years. My sense is like, at least on the business front, it's like harder to make that sell that sale in any sort of blockchain orientated place today because of maybe like things not panning out. Now I know that in other industries, you do still sell on the technology.


I think in AI, it's all about, you know, benchmarks that like people in the know, know what you mean, but the average person may not. And so you see that.


[Tarun] (33:06 - 33:08)
You're telling me TPS is not the same thing?


[Anna Rose] (33:12 - 33:20)
But yeah, it seems like today, and at least at ZK, it's like the sales pitch is less, should be probably less technical. It's more like what can it do for you?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (33:21 - 33:39)
Is it just that we have a different audience for the sales pitch? Like at first you're pitching to the nerds, you know, and then you're pitching to the token people who already are in an ecosystem. And now you've pitched to those two groups and you're like, who else can I go see?


If I want to go pitch mainstream, I need a more like product mind or product approach. 


[Guillermo Angeris] (33:39 - 33:57)
Exactly. Like it's it's the grow up moment for the, I mean, we've talked about this, but it's a really important moment for the blockchain field, right? Like, like now people are actually going to start using this stuff. It's like, OK, well, that means you got to go be in the conversations with people who are actually using this stuff, not other nerds who are like going to mess around with it and be like, ah, cool.


[Nico]
It was fun, though. 


[Guillermo]
It was very fun.


[Anna Rose] (33:57 - 33:58)
Yeah.


[Guillermo Angeris] (33:58 - 33:59)
You know, back in the day.


[Anna Rose] (33:59 - 36:29)
I mean, maybe we can keep talking amongst nerds. We just have to sort of move in a certain direction. And I have some ideas for this show, like I was sort of hinting at there.


And I think we've actually been doing over the last year, which is like expanding out into these different realms because ZK is doing that. Like, I can kind of follow the threads of ZK as it moves into these other places. And I want to do that.


I do want to spend some time in this episode kind of covering the use cases that we talked about in the last year. We've had a bunch on the show. I mentioned already a couple and use cases we could see in the pipeline because it did get really interesting this year.


Like going back to 2023, 2024, we were all talking about coprocessors and ZKVMs and a little bit maybe of ZKID. Since then, ZKVMs have become almost commodity. ZKID, the European Union is like exploring it.


All these like Google's explored it with licences like it's actually a thing. It's being used. I think a lot of people who've listened to this show have probably interacted with some sort of ZKID product at this point.


I have. You may not know it's ZK, but there's a good chance you have touched it if you listen to this show. Not the mainstream.


I don't think the whole world has touched ZK yet, but I think a lot of us have. We talked about the web proofs. That was, I think back then, not really on our radar.


That really came out last year. We had the ZK case for Lighter. We had them on the show, which is a perpdex based on ZK.


We had watermarking using ZK and AI. We had verifiable databases just recently, Nico. We've talked about ZK making things post-quantum a lot.


So using things like cryptography that was not post-quantum all of a sudden using a ZKP that is post-quantum potentially helping to make it safer. We've talked about migrating also. I don't know if this is going to be the way that it's done, but in order to migrate some of these systems to be post-quantum, you can then use ZKPs to prove that they've been migrated, that kind of thing.


And then what was just mentioned was this proving something about research in the Google context, the quantum paper that just came out recently. I mean, those are just a few of these use cases that we've touched on on the show. Are there any others that I'm missing that you are thinking about that you've seen?


[Tarun] (36:30 - 37:01)
I mean, I'll just say one thing that's sort of a common thread to most of them is that the capital that went into funding ZKVMs basically made the startup costs for doing any of these applications like one one thousandth or one ten thousandth of what they were. Because a lot of them just use the ZKVMs in ways the ZKVM creators didn't expect. But, you know, at the end of the day, I think the ZKVMs themselves are like this public good that other people will figure out how to make something people want from versus like the VM itself has some like value it can kind of capture as well.


[Anna Rose] (37:02 - 37:09)
Totally. Are there other ways that you could imagine? I mean, I guess we don't know yet how this gets used, but anything that needs to be verified.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:10 - 37:36)
For me, the databases thing is really cool. And the idea of like you were saying, Tarun, earlier, like there's a lot of databases provider. It's not really interoperable with ZK.


Maybe you do start having interoperability there. And maybe we have a more decentralised data ecosystem. And I'm with the dreamers on this one.


I want people to hold their data a lot more and to interact with each other's data in a privacy preserving way. So hopefully with ZK.


[Anna Rose] (37:37 - 37:37)
Yeah.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:37 - 37:39)
Yeah. And I hope we're going to see more and more of them.


[Anna Rose] (37:39 - 38:56)
When I first joined the space back in 2017, we talked I mean, I think one of the first episodes of the show was actually about the decentralised space around the year 2000. The explosion of downloading music programmes and all of the file sharing and the crackdown, the winter that followed, where it all went like the file sharing folks became kind of dark webby, like they had to go into hiding in a way. And some more illicit stuff was also happening over there.


Then you have this rumour is true. You know what I'm talking about. Nico's giving me a face, but there's this reemergence that there was this reemergence at the time, 2016, 2017, of just the concepts of having like decentralisation being valuable of nodes of, you know, data sharing and some sort of joint, you know, universal state.


I wonder, and I hope not, but like, are we potentially heading back into a sort of decentralisation winter where that true decentralisation, where you're like, the more institutions that get involved, the more things become a little bit more centralised? Like are we on the cusp of a decentralisation winter?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:56 - 39:23)
Aren't we seeing this tension a bit already play out with the layer 1s? 


[Tarun] 
Yeah, I feel like I feel like you're describing it as if it's in the future. 


[Nico] 
But I think we're already seeing this tension, right?


Like Ethereum is sort of doubling down with manifestos about decentralisation. And on the other side, you have things like Tempo that are very centralised in a way and very like more of a Web 2.0 way of doing things. I don't know where I'm going with this because I don't know much about Tempo.


[Anna Rose] (39:24 - 39:30)
I mean, I think in general, we're just like letting that hang, like, did you just diss Tempo? Is he going to say something else?


[Tarun] (39:30 - 40:20)
The goalposts have moved, right? It feels like the goalposts have just been like expanding over time to make things more useful to like someone who doesn't want to manage private keys on their own, right? Like fundamentally.


And I think that's probably fine, but it's a little bit like streaming services and file sharing, like what you're talking about, right? Like arguably, a lot of the streaming services basically took a lot of what the file sharing people had and figured out how to like monetise it better and distribute it better. But, you know, obviously the cost of the centralisation and this sort of, I would argue that that's what you already see, like forgetting even this L1 thing is like, I think a little bit certainly less decentralised than the ideal case, but on the application level, there's like way more centralisation than right now than there was in like 2020, let's say.


[Anna Rose] (40:20 - 40:21)
But things also work better.


[Tarun] (40:22 - 40:52)
Things work better, more users, right? So there's kind of this trade-off and the question is like, what is the boundary that like will be settled on? Because I don't think it's like, hey, there's just like this is decentralised, this is not.


And like binary, I think like right now people are willing to blur the lines on that a lot. And I'm not saying it's good or bad. I'm just saying like philosophically, you know, what I eight years ago, I thought would survive just seems to like not be true.


It seems to kind of be this Frankenstein decentralisation.


[Anna Rose] (40:52 - 42:01)
Yeah. And but then it's almost like we're also maybe thinking very much in that financial sense. But talk about like think about social media and like the awareness that people I think now have of data pooling, data mining off like, you know, social media comes like first the Internet.


You all have your own blog. You have to run it your own servers. It's like really decentralised, but also really awkward.


Then social media comes along and all of a sudden you can share everything you want with friends. You don't need to create a blog. Super, super easy.


But then one company owns it. You make an agreement. Actually, there's two ideas here.


One's a rant that I already did in the last episode, which is like you made it. You made an agreement to give them your data for ads, but not to be fed into the A.I. machine like screw them for now, you know, pulling the rug on you. That's one side.


But the other side is like nowadays I think people are way more aware that their data is owned by a centralised body like meta when you're interacting with a meta product. I feel like you're more aware that you're I mean, yeah, maybe it is just me. I don't know.


Maybe maybe I'm or maybe I'm speaking to the audience who also feels that way. But I think it's more mainstream. Don't you think it's more mainstream?


[Tarun] (42:01 - 42:28)
If you if you read if you look at meta's user base, their user base in among educated people has just been shrinking. It's like that bifurcation of like having enough education to think about this conceptual thing of like someone owning your data or not. I'm not saying that's like a very high bar, but that like that there it takes some amount of like education and wherewithal.


Right. That doesn't really exist in their user base. Their user base who believe that already left.


Okay.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (42:28 - 42:33)
Realistically. But those people are happy to go and like put in their whole lives into like chat GPT or.


[Tarun] (42:33 - 44:12)
Right. It's just picking a different master. Like I'm not I'm not I'm not I'm not going to discount that.


And it doesn't really feel like we're moving in a direction as a world where we're going to go backwards to decentralisation because like the compute costs needed is too enormous or something. 


[Guillermo] I have a disagreeing take on this particular bit, but. Okay, good.


[Tarun]
Give me some optimism. I generally am very pessimistic. Yes, please.


[Guillermo]
I don't know. This is this is a bit of a weird tangent, but I'll go back to the original point, which is like I don't I've been reading a lot of weird like quasi dystopian, but quasi utopian science fiction. And like one funny prevalent bit is like everything is smart.


Like when compute is really, really, really cheap, you just like make everything smart by default, because why not? Right. And of course, like Tarun's pointing out this very interesting problem, which of course, like the best models right now obviously take a lot of compute because you have to run them on these huge servers.


But most things do not need the best models. Most things need something that is good enough. And for most applications that we are actually care about, actually, funnily enough, I mean, these tiny open source models are already like blowing everything out of the water that it can even exist two years ago.


And my guess is, you know, if you ever wanted the like utopian future of the like little AI God in your phone that like is organising stuff and thinking about stuff and like putting stuff in your calendar or whatever, we're actually getting closer to that than I think most of us like even see. I mean, it's very weird, you know, for most even these little open source models, right? Like have capabilities that are similar to what like 4.0 was back in the day, which is crazy.


But 4.0 was already very, very, very good. I know people were using it for everything.


[Anna Rose] (44:12 - 44:13)
For certain things. Yeah.


[Guillermo Angeris] (44:13 - 46:16)
Yeah. Everything from taking, you know, a bunch of doctor's notes visits and then taking that, summarising it and putting it into like a medical form. Like you could just do that.


You just gave it a small cheat sheet that said, here's how you do this. And then it would just go do it. And imagine that, but for everything in ambient as you're, you know, doing stuff or writing stuff or thinking about stuff or whatever, and you're saying stuff out loud, you can imagine a similar version of this.


So my point is like, there's two things at play. There's like the best models. Well, I think, I think Tarun, your instinct is a hundred percent right.


It's just like, dude, you're going to have to run that shit on like some crazy server somewhere in the middle of nowhere or maybe in space or whatever, however people are doing it, you know, but for like, that's, you know, much the same way that like, I don't run, you know, paint on a supercomputer when I want to draw a little smiley face. I'm not going to send out like this thing to a huge model whenever it's something like, please organise my calendar. 

[Tarun]
On the other hand, you know, we're talking about is ZK dead?


And I will personally say the only proofs I bother reading or checking nowadays are ones by frontier models because like the math formalisation stuff is like, it's way more interesting than ZK, right? Like the most interesting proofs in the world right now that are being made are being made by frontier model AI stuff, not like me verifying a tiny ZK proof in the zkVM. And that to me is actually the more inspiring thing than like, okay, I could verify myself.


The fact that this is actually finding stuff that humans have fucked up or missed for many centuries in math, like there was a very exciting result yesterday that basically took the thing that like people have made a very overly complicated way of like kind of proving and they found an insanely elementary way of proving it because they made the correct connection between different fields of math. That type of stuff, those types of proofs, that to me is the one thing I feel optimistic about more so than like cryptographic proofs, unfortunately. 

[Guillermo] Wow.


I love Tarun, so bearish on the cryptographic proofs. I agree.


Actually, 


[Tarun] I will say that stuff is insane. 

[Guillermo]
This is like Erdős Problem #1196 or something like that. Yeah, exactly.


Insane. Like I showed you the very beautiful result.


[Tarun] (46:16 - 46:17)
Like that was such a beautiful result.


[Guillermo Angeris] (46:17 - 47:04)
It was great. And in fact, it might actually like that result and that connection. 


[Tarun] 
It might be the first time AI proof is like shown some novelty that like a human has completely missed.


[Guillermo] 


Wow. Yeah. But that being said, my point is almost all of the intelligence that we need on the day-to-day is not going to be mathematics level intelligence that solves Irish problem 1196.


It is please organise my like seven idiotic thoughts that I've just stated out loud in a way into my notes such that then I can like go back and reread them in some like interesting way. 
[Tarun] Guillermo, a WhisperFlow user. 


[Guillermo] That's me.


Actually, no, I probably should use WhisperFlow more than I do. 


[Tarun] 
Again, again, there's so many of these AI products like that where it's like, yeah, you probably could run them locally, but it's so much more of a pain in the ass that no one does it.


Right 


Like I would love to see that, right? But like I don't think anyone seems to care. Like the market incentives are just so distorted to just be centralised.






[Guillermo] 
Well, I don't know. I mean, here I'll give you one incentive before I get off my high horse here, but it's the answer is whenever you send it up to a service, of course, it's a recurring cost for the service. Whereas if it runs in your phone, it's free for the service.


So I don't know. I mean, I agree. I'm with you.


Like this is what it seems like. But I think there's like not all despair, especially as compute gets better on smaller devices and stuff. Now frontier math stuff, frontier stuff.


I agree. That'll be in some server somewhere. Maybe in space.


[Tarun] 
I mean, it's not even just like on the server. It's like how many racks of a data centre am I using?


[Guillermo] (47:47 - 47:47)
Correct.


[Tarun] (47:48 - 49:04)
The thing that maybe is like a source of optimism that's maybe more closely related to like the cryptographic proof and decentralised systems type of world is in the same way that I think crypto, one of the origins of cryptocurrencies was blockchains was really how do we monetise open source in a way that like rewards contributors, right? Like that was sort of actually one of the earliest ethos. It was like, hey, we're like, and there's a sense in which the type of thing Guillermo is talking about of like local models on your phone type of stuff.


There's no real market incentive for that right now, right? Like the market incentive is like, I just make the service and I charge you some premium relative to what compute I charge, right? It's like very much like the web 2.0 2007, right?


When AWS was starting to blow up, it has like a lot of that vibe, but there hasn't been a funding structure that has like incentivised the local stuff beyond like I'm a big company and like my inference cost is too high. I'm like Airbnb, I'm going to throw away my open AI subscription and do everything in Quen, right? Like that's true, but like there hasn't been that for the individual, right?


There hasn't been that like sovereign individual moment for these models. And I don't know what will do that, but the incentive structures right now do not encourage that.


[Anna Rose] (49:04 - 50:25)
It's funny that description that you gave Guillermo. I mean, as I've been listening to a lot of the mostly American podcasts just about the future of AI, it's very American centric. And it's like America has the data centres.


China might have some data centres, but America has all the data centres. America is going to have the AGI. One of the companies is going to get it and they're going to control the world.


And then, you know, Europe has regulated itself into, you know, being off track. So that's one version of the world. But one of the things that that assumes is a locus of control.


And if this thing becomes what they promise it's going to be, then like how do you control it? So who's to say that it wouldn't be somehow like distributed out to those places that don't necessarily who have not created it and don't necessarily have the compute.


Do you know what I mean? Like, I know that there's the infrastructure part. And like for the short term, it will exist where the compute exists.


But if the long term goal is something beyond, you know, the thing we're supposed to be all afraid of, then nobody can really control that. Like, it's not like the U.S. president then controls this thing. Like, I think there's this concept that it's like, oh, it's like a weapon that I can point at something, but it's like maybe short term.


But if you if what you're saying is really going to come to pass, and I think there's a bit of it's a more more nuanced picture. This may just be an EU cope, by the way.


[Guillermo Angeris] (50:26 - 51:03)
Yes, maybe I'm going to get rid of it for like one second and then I'll snap out of it, which is, you know, what most people draw the conclusion, I think, which is very weird and maybe it's right and this is my version of cope that to get AGI or whatever, whatever that means to whatever we have it or we had it or whatever. But the strong version of that, you need a bunch of compute. And in fact, it's very, very, very difficult and all the stuff.


And one very dumb observation that I've had is that actually intelligence seems to be kind of a thing that is relatively easy to make.


[Anna] (51:04 - 51:04)
Hmm.


[Guillermo Angeris] (51:05 - 52:23)
Right. Like in particular, you know, I don't know if you've taken a look at these like architectures or whatever, but they're kind of, you know, there's a lot of empirical stuff that went into making these architectures correct, but like they still feel a little bit like spaghetti thrown at a wall. And yet these things can like solve problems that have been like major open problems in mathematics for a very, very long time.


And so that to me, this is like the weird cynical version of it doesn't point to the fact of like, oh, AI is getting really, really good and it's going to like do all the stuff. And this is like the right way of doing it. It's more like intelligence seems to like as a whole in this like very broad sense of the word seems to be like a thing that's actually pretty common and like not super ultra difficult.


Like human intelligence is like a result of like evolution over millions of years. But like somehow there's like a notion of intelligence that is like more similar than we expected to human intelligence. And yet it exists in a data centre.


And the way it works is by like taking these random matrix vector products and back propagating over data and then doing some post-training on it. I'm like, you're good. Right.


And so in some sense, I think I agree with you on it, which is like it's a little bit of a cat out of the bag moment. It's like the second that somebody achieves something even close to it, there's two things just like number one is it becomes easier for other people to build that thing.


[Anna Rose] (52:23 - 52:23)
Potentially.


[Guillermo Angeris] (52:24 - 52:28)
Right. Because it is known to be good. And in turn, it can be used to help you build that thing.


[Anna Rose] (52:28 - 52:32)
And it may not need as much compute. Right. Like once it's trained, you don't need it.


[Guillermo Angeris] (52:32 - 53:14)
Well, yeah, exactly. And as we discover more things, we get more efficient. This is the whole thing of the small models I was saying, right?


Like small models now, if you like if you take a small model and you were to bring it back to 2022, people would be like, oh, that is like AGI or whatever, you know, even though models of the time were trained with like way more processing power potentially and always. But but so it's interesting. I don't know.


I mean, like to me, the lesson is like intelligence actually is not as rare as we maybe think it is, and in turn, that has weird implications for like the distribution of the technology much more. And maybe this is my version of cope. I don't know much more than the, you know, the alternative view of like this thing is really hard and very particular.


And like the only way to do it is like this way. And if you have it, you control everything.


[Anna Rose] (53:14 - 53:28)
Yeah. I feel like we should make a -  there's a moment that's just happened. One, we've decided that ZK is dead.


Rest in peace, ZK and all of cryptography. 


And two, this podcast has just become an AI podcast. Just kidding.


No, I won't.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (53:28 - 53:28)
I won't.


[Anna Rose] (53:28 - 53:33)
But please, no. OK, Nico, Nico, you have a thought. OK, go.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (53:33 - 54:11)
ZK is not dead. What I've been saying is like ZK has made it. 


ZK is like TLS, it's like encryption.


[Anna] ZK is alive and well 


[Nico]


It's like, yeah, it's deploying. It's now commodity. It's boring.


We know how to do it. Now we have to all go like little soldiers, plant that ZK flag everywhere we can outside of blockchain. So ZK is very alive.


It is dead in the sense of if you're trying to, I don't know, start a company, get VC funding from these big blockchain VCs, it's a bit late for that, you know, like the ZK has moved on. But the ZK army is out there and there's a lot, a lot to do. So no, it's not dead.


Yes, I agree.


[Anna Rose] (54:12 - 55:12)
ZK did something which was unexpected. Originally, it was created for privacy and then it had that succinctness. It had this compression element, this like you can say something about a large amount of data in a very small proof.


In kind of going back to that conversation, we just had Guillermo on models and like the big models and all the computation that has to go into it. And then the smaller models that can like exist everywhere. I keep having this, this thought of like, could we create sort of ZKP like client, like things for AI, like in the AI context where you have, you have a tonne of computation that needs to happen, but then you have like these small proofs about what's happened.


I know this is a little bit vague and it's not a fully thought out idea, but it is, it's just taking some of the, some of the findings that we've found with the show, with the space over the last eight years, things you can do with it. And I'm trying to see if you can apply that into the AI context.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (55:13 - 56:03)
There's a couple of cool things. One of them being, we have this asymmetry, right? Like I want to ask questions on my phone and get answers from this big machine.


Asymmetry, again, is a nice place for zero knowledge proof. Big machine can do big proof, well, small proof sent to my small machine and I verify. So that's one thing.


And a lot of companies these days are looking at this. Another one is this sort of like DA kind of approach where instead of verifying the whole thing, you could like sample a bit and a bunch of us, I don't know, you could have a network of like light clients essentially. Yeah.


Maybe there's something out there. The underlying question to me is, do we need slash want verifiable AI? Like I feel a lot of people are going into that space, but I don't know if there's demand for it.


I agree. Yeah. The verifiable AI thing is a little bit of a funny bit.


[Guillermo Angeris] (56:04 - 56:15)
I mean, it's, I think there's one version of it, which is kind of makes sense, which is, look, you want a verifiable AI inference if you're going to put some output of the AI on chain in some sense, or use some output of that to take some action. That is like economically important. 


[Nico Mohnblatt] (56:16 - 56:23)
Yeah. Give the blockchain eyes and ears that used to be the EZKL pitch.


[Guillermo Angeris] (56:23 - 57:12)
Yeah. Maybe exactly that, but that's about kind of it. I know some people have thought about it for other things like decentralised training and stuff like that, where it's like, okay, you to do training, you have to prove that you've done certain computations correctly.


And so that's nice. But it's the, the problem is like the overhead of these things is insane, right? So training is already a very expensive operation and you have to do with like the cool part about AI is you train once and you can deploy it a gajillion times, which is why, you know, open source models are neat is somebody has them to work and then everybody benefits.


But the training part is very expensive, right? So adding this additional verifiable layer on top, there's even more expensive, even if it means that you can kind of distribute the training across these smaller devices or things like that, which is a different way of interpreting your question that I believe.


[Anna Rose] (57:13 - 57:20)
But I feel like I wasn't really thinking about like the ZKML proposals as they stand today, but it was 


[Tarun] (57:20 - 57:23)
No, no, no. I think you're asking like conceptually, like.


[Anna Rose] (57:23 - 57:23)
Yeah, exactly.


[Guillermo Angeris] (57:23 - 1:00:04)
And I would say that there already are things like that. So like, you know, post-training is actually has this kind of like polylog versus linear separation thing where like in post-training, I have a trained model, but then I want to do some reinforcement learning to get it to learn a certain thing. So I give it a bunch of rewards for reaching certain tasks.


And then I basically like run an algorithm that tries to find those tasks. And the point is that the rewards act almost like a proof where they're like, I can verify that I did the right thing if I collect as many rewards as possible. And you can show in some cases, like there is this kind of separation akin to ZK, not always, but like in some cases.


But the thing is what people do in practise and all these RL training environments is much more complicated than any of these kind of like simplistic things you could actually get formal guarantees for. And honestly, no one cares about the formal guarantees don't really improve the product you get in these models. That's like the that's the fundamental problem, right?


Like in ZK, the formal guarantees do actually improve the product, right? They improve how big is the proof? How fast can I construct it?


How many times can I recurse? In AI, you don't really like those properties, like really having the guarantee of that doesn't matter. And one of the reasons then ZK and cryptography in general, you start with a threat model, assume an adversary can have this much compute, this much bandwidth, this much whatever access to these types of functions, show that they can't break this or show that they can break this, right?


In AI, you don't care about the threat model, right? I mean, that's why the attacks against these systems are just so large. And that's why you're seeing all these like crazy cybersecurity things happening right now.


And because there's no threat model, and there's not really a way to define one of like, what is the set of all attacks against this thing? It's like becomes harder to make verifiability a useful property. It might be useful in some instance wise context, but not globally.


And so I think there's a lot of lessons that are similar that you can find between these two places. And I don't just mean verifiable AI, I mean like in how people design training, like I would bet a lot of money that a lot of the best post-training algorithms are basically things that learn something like ZK, where it's like, I give enough breadcrumbs such that I only have to verify a logarithmic number of breadcrumbs, but I get the whole path, right? Something like there is some proximity type thing going on, but I'm not sure that formalising it gets you anything to make your model better.


Whereas like in ZK, formalising it does give you something. It tells you a bit of, you know, what's the minimum number of bits you need, like what's the coding rate, like you don't care about that in AI stuff, unfortunately.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:05 - 1:01:04)
So we just, we've kind of run out of time in this recording block, and that's a bummer because there's a big topic that we didn't get to, which is privacy. And 2026 being the year of privacy, it may be something we need to talk about on a future episode. Obviously, this has been a very big topic in our community.


I do think in the context of what we just described, that privacy part maybe becomes like a relevant feature someday, somehow. But I do want to say thanks to all of you for being on the show, for being my co-hosts, and for sticking with me. Episode 399, only 399 more to go or something.


I don't know. I mean, I definitely want to, I mean, I got to make it to 500. Now that I'm like making it to 400, 500 seems very within reach.


It's only like two years worth of, well, two or three years worth of content. It's a requirement now. It's a requirement now.


Yeah. But yeah, thank you guys for joining on this episode and for being my co-hosts.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (1:01:05 - 1:01:05)
Thank you. Always a pleasure.


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:01:06 - 1:01:16)
Yeah. Thank you for having us. I mean, I don't know.


I don't know who the hell would want to deal with, certainly, at least Tarun and I. Nico's a lovely person, but Tarun and I are kind of annoying, you know? So who'd want to deal with both of us for however long you have been dealing with us?


[Anna Rose] (1:01:16 - 1:01:19)
I like how your self-deprecation also covers Tarun.


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:01:20 - 1:02:00)
I love him dearly, you know? 


[Tarun] Yeah, I think Guillermo was my intern 10 years ago. 


[Guillermo] I was.


[Tarun] 
It's about to be 10 years. So, you know, I think once you hit a decade, you're allowed to cash talk. 


[Guillermo]
Sorry, if you can't see this, I'm forming a big heart to Tarun right now on the screen.


[Tarun] 
You know, I'm excited. However, you know, we were talking about ZK being dead, but I actually think there's like a kind of interesting thing that someone should be building, which is of total public good. Because like, don't try to pitch this.


No one's going to pay for this. But it's basically a ZK-ify this agent. Like you just point it at some code base and you're like, try to find everywhere you could shove a ZK proof and like generate, generate.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:02 - 1:02:12)
Okay, I have another wish. Those model announcements that they don't want to share with the public, use ZKPs to prove something about those models to the public.


[Tarun] (1:02:12 - 1:02:21)
Exactly. Like there's all these things like that, that I'm kind of hopeful people do. Like that are not the stuff we've talked about the last 399 episodes.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:22 - 1:02:36)
True. All right. Thanks, folks.


Kobi, we miss you. We hope to see you soon on the show. 


We love you Kobi! I want to say thank you to the podcast team.


Rachel, Henrik, Hector and Tanya and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.