[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:28)


Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Guillermo and I catch up with Dev Ojha, co-founder of Osmosis and a longtime ZK researcher.


We discussed the story of Osmosis since we last had him on in 2021, as well as the role of Osmosis in the Cosmos ecosystem, an ecosystem which, like many that we've covered over the years, has gone through a boom and a bust. It's introduced pioneering technologies, but also sped-run experiments in proof-of-stake, cross-chain communication, and inspired truly decentralised communities to emerge.


Today, the network is significantly smaller than it was when we last discussed it. But it's left an everlasting mark on the shape of today's technology and architectures. So join us for this recap.


We then move on to Dev's new work on Zcash and privacy technologies in general. He and the group he was working with made significant contributions to ZK research in the 2019-2020 era, but stepped aside after this to work primarily on Osmosis.


Now he's back in the fold, tackling the new challenges and the problems to solve in the recently reinvigorated decentralised privacy space.


We are happy to have him back.


Before we kick off, three quick points.


First, zkSummit is coming back with its 14th edition. Applications to attend are now open. It will be on May 7th in Rome, so I hope to see you there.


Second, zkMesh+, our paid subscription tier, is rolling. We have released a few bonus clips over there, as well as some of our exclusive research reports. If you want to get access, please join the paid tier.


Third, if you're looking for other ways to support the show, we have donation accounts visible in the footer of our website. Support definitely goes a long way. So if you do decide to donate, thank you in advance. That's all for now. Links are in the show notes.


Now here is our interview with Dev Ojha.


Today, Guillermo and I are here with Dev Ojha. Welcome back to the show, Dev.


[Dev Ojha] (2:28 - 2:33)


Hey, thanks for having me back on. It's been crazy. I think last time was day after Osmosis launch.


[Anna Rose] (2:33 - 3:10)


2021. We looked at this. So it was July 2021. We're now talking almost, what is it, 5 years later, like almost.


So this will be very much a catch-up episode. I think we want to hear more about what's the story of Osmosis since we had you on speaking about that.


I do want to highlight one other episode that you did before that. You were in Alessandro's group. You were doing like hardcore ZK systems design research papers.


And that's how I first met you. You've been part of this paper Fractal.


Were you part of other work back then? Maybe people might be familiar with?


[Dev Ojha] (3:10 - 3:18)


I was part of [?] Aurora's Southern STARK work. And then I helped out Marlin and a lot of the libraries, like libiop and arkworks.


[Anna Rose] (3:18 - 3:37)


Very cool. So I think people are familiar with your work if they've been listening since then. Then you switched over to Osmosis.


I think what we should do with this episode is do a catch-up. And I know that you've been getting more involved once again with ZK and privacy. So we'll definitely have to touch on that.


I want to say hi, Guillermo. How's it going?


[Guillermo Angeris] (3:37 - 3:39)


What's up? Doing well over here.


[Anna Rose] (3:40 - 3:42)


How do you guys know each other?


[Guillermo Angeris] (3:42 - 3:43)


How do we know each other?


[Dev Ojha] (3:44 - 3:47)


Tarun intro'd us right after Osmosis launched at some point.


[Guillermo Angeris] (3:47 - 3:47)


Oh, that's right.


[Dev Ojha] (3:48 - 3:55)


I just unpinned our Telegram chat, Trading CFMM for ZK. I had it pinned on top of my Telegram for 5 years.


[Guillermo Angeris] (3:56 - 3:59)


That's crazy. I totally forgot about that.


[Dev Ojha] (3:59 - 4:00)


I literally unpinned it this morning.


[Guillermo Angeris] (4:00 - 4:08)


You were just like, oh, yeah, this guy sucks. Never mind. I'm out.


Honestly, fair enough. I'm with you. Like, totally understand. I get it.


[Anna Rose] (4:08 - 4:09)


Old research. Old research.


[Guillermo Angeris] (4:09 - 4:14)


That's right. I remember I think we met at the Osmosis, was it a launch party that you had?


[Dev Ojha] (4:15 - 4:15)


Yeah.


[Guillermo Angeris] (4:15 - 4:20)


I think that's what it was. And then we just spent like the two hours or an hour and a half hours talking to each other or whatever.


[Dev Ojha] (4:20 - 4:20)


Yeah. Great times.


[Guillermo Angeris] (4:21 - 4:22)


Yeah. Back in the days. That's crazy.


[Anna Rose] (4:24 - 4:56)


Nice. All right. So, Dev, I think we are due for a catch-up.


When you were on last, you were launching Osmosis. Osmosis was and maybe still is one of the key pieces of the Cosmos ecosystem. However, the Cosmos ecosystem, especially of late, has changed, has shrank. It's a different world.


But I want to go back in time to 2021 and sort of talk about that arc that Osmosis had because I'm sure it's been a wild ride.


[Dev Ojha] (4:56 - 5:08)


Yeah, it's been awesome. It was kind of cool. I think it's a rare moment where kind of everything you've done connects of like both the Fractal work, Osmosis stuff and like being here day after launch and where we are today.


So I'm kind of excited to go into it




[Anna Rose] (5:08 - 5:08)


Cool.


[Dev Ojha] (5:09 - 5:52)


So we launched Osmosis. Part of the thinking or belief was blockchain had three problems at the tim; scalability, privacy and proof-of-stake.


We had at the time roughly believed we'd kind of mentally solve proof-of-stake and we know exactly what to do for scalability. It's just a matter of doing those.


On scalability, I actually agree. On proof-of-stake, I think there's one big idea that happened since 2021, which is using like DAG-based proof-of-stake or people now call it MCP stuff.


But on that, I also think that proof-of-stake is the shape of what's roughly known in 2021.


But privacy was not at all. So and privacy, we at the time broke into two subcomponents, MEV and anonymity.


[Anna Rose] (5:52 - 6:09)


So it was privacy at the consensus level, where validators basically knowing ahead or people being able to front run. This was a form of privacy you would want.


And then there was the privacy for the user, which is sort of the way we often understand privacy in the blockchain context.


[Dev Ojha] (6:10 - 6:41)


Yeah. So maybe today I'd use slightly different words, but that's how we broke down at the time.


So like, okay, we want to solve... let's first solve some MEV stuff. But solving MEV is not a product, a DEX is a product.


So this leads us to appchain Osmosis. And then we always tell ourself, once we get the MEV-resistance DEX solid and ecosystem around it, we'll switch back to privacy stuff.


So when we talked first, we just launched the DEX. And then we were actively working on this threshold decryption scheme.


[Anna Rose] (6:42 - 6:42)


Yes.


[Dev Ojha] (6:42 - 7:00)


So the idea is that you block MEV or you block many class MEV by not letting validators see a user's transaction prior to being available for execution.


Like you couldn't reorder or censor someone based off content because you can't see it. So you could not front run someone on a trade.


[Anna Rose] (7:01 - 7:06)


But was that part of that initial build or is that something like an idea at the time?


[Dev Ojha] (7:06 - 8:31)


We didn't launch with it. We wrote papers on it and built libraries for it in collaboration with Anoma, and then we also designed a change for Tendermint to kind of... you could think of it as the first MCP like thing.


We got this implemented through Tendermint, but there was a bunch of like, kind of a classic Cosmos problem is getting things merged and ecosystem adopted takes way longer than just writing code takes.


So we had this all done, I'd say within four months of launch, code wise, but then there's a bunch of security stuff and getting us to an ecosystem standard took like two years of delay.


So at some point we kind of deprioritize this threshold decryption part and focus on other MEV solutions and instead like go for this path of like, well, but while we launched Osmosis, we actually hit a heavy PMF of this DeFi Summer, it's like DeFi season back then, 2021, and then all these Cosmos coins that people were really excited about, like Akash, DVPN, Iris, they had never had a market before, and now getting a DEX makes their product actually usable.


So there's like kind of glorious surge of, oh, people started paying for like cloud computers with Akash. People could like acquire Sentinel to do a decentralised VPN, trade $ATOM and whatnot.


So we get a lot of demand on this DeFi side and like start really focusing on how we build a DeFi ecosystem.


How do you optimise stable swaps?


[Anna Rose] (8:31 - 8:58)


This is 2021. Yeah, this is also like bull run moment, like 2021, 2022 and Cosmos all of a sudden, like really with the launch of Osmosis becomes what it said it was going to be, which is this interchain network of different chains, right?


Because before that they were all standalone. Maybe they existed on centralized exchanges, but they weren't actually attached to each other as far as I know, until really you guys launched.


[Dev Ojha] (8:58 - 9:25)


Yeah. We're the face of the first usage of IBC.


And at the time... and I actually still stand by this, IBC is your best bridge of you go from multi-hour delays on other websites to now you can deposit, withdraw, integrate in one site, the whole thing is done in 10 seconds.


It's way less scary, etc. So now you get this ecosystem of chains that work together. And then Terra ends up being this killer use case because this is before Terra collapsed.


[Anna Rose] (9:25 - 10:03)


Problematic. But this is like looking back, you can see it like a slow motion crash coming. But at the time, people believed the Terra was real and could do what it said it could do, not knowing that there was this fatal flaw that could even accidentally be triggered, which caused a full cascade of a stablecoins.


So stablecoin is something supposed to be pegged to the dollar, fully decreasing in value and losing kind of everything, and then tanking in a way everything attached to it.


So tell me about that experience. Actually, we've never done a like a recap on that.


[Dev Ojha] (10:03 - 11:06)


So we don't really appreciate the fact that we were caught up in the UST carry trade somehow.


Like it's a bull market. You're like, oh, the product's great. It's like numbers going up, volumes going up. We ever stopped back to think and stared at why is there so much UST volume? What is the source?


And it turned out that this ended up being the best co-located DEX because we're not on... there's DEXs on Terra, like Astroport, which had high volumes. But then there's DEXs on other chains, like they have this ETH bridge where there's this Curve 4pool. I don't know if people remember that, like the whole depeg started when Terra pulled liquidity to switch pools.


So there's stuff on Ethereum and then there was stuff on Avalanche.


This one is a little bit memory holes. I don't quite remember the details, but there's some like degen box trade or juice box, I forget the name of it, where there's a high leverage trading strategy that went through Avalanche somehow for yield farming.


[Guillermo Angeris] (11:06 - 11:08)


This part I don't remember, actually. Oh, man.


[Dev Ojha] (11:08 - 11:11)


Okay. It's part of the carry trade.


[Guillermo Angeris] (11:11 - 11:12)


I believe that.


[Dev Ojha] (11:12 - 11:49)


So we thought... so we look at volumes, we thought those were the sources. But it turned out kind of empirically, oh, no, it was actually a lot that was going through Osmosis. And that was part of the huge pump in price and then volume numbers at the time.


So when UST collapses, this is almost like existential. So there's a couple of existential things that happened at the same time.


Okay, one, there's no other stablecoin in Cosmos. It was just UST. 


Why?


Well, we actually were trying to get an Ethereum bridge at the time. What happened is I [?] care to tell our bridge security.


I still do.


[Anna Rose] (11:49 - 11:56)


Yeah. I remember you guys did a runoff, right? You were interviewing different bridge companies and like... who did you end up landing on?


[Dev Ojha] (11:57 - 12:15)


We used Axelar at the time. And the reason... it went through governance. But I was actually really proud of this as a reason.


What happened is there's four competitors. There's Wormhole, but Wormhole just had a 200 million dollar hack on Solana. There was this team called Gravity Bridge, Axelar and Nomad, [?] James Prestwich, which is a project.


[Anna Rose] (12:15 - 12:19)


Which also later got a big hack that tanked some other networks.


[Dev Ojha] (12:19 - 12:33)


Yeah. So we talked about all the security and like, guys, the bridge is a single point of failure. You cannot have any system where a single bug or single hack can make you go from like... go to zero, especially if you have a lot of money in it. 


So you need a rate limit.


[Anna Rose] (12:33 - 12:35)


This is pre-Terra fail, I guess. Right.


[Dev Ojha] (12:36 - 12:36)


Yes.


[Anna Rose] (12:36 - 12:40)


Oh, wow. So this is like your focus had been on the bridging. You were like, the bridging's got to be great.


[Dev Ojha] (12:40 - 12:40)


Security.


[Anna Rose] (12:41 - 12:48)


And meanwhile, you had this like disaster token in the heart of what you were doing.


[Dev Ojha] (12:49 - 12:56)


So maybe like four weeks pre-crash we talked about this. I'm like, okay, we need to get the bridge thing finalised. Get everyone to like finalise this.


[Anna Rose] (12:56 - 12:57)


But it hadn't quite happened.


[Dev Ojha] (12:58 - 13:42)


No, because we also didn't think the Terra thing with UST was as pressing as it was. Maybe there's an issue and it could be a slight depeg this year. Not like this is imminent. Days matter.


So we talked to each of the things of like, hey, you need to ensure you can't go to zero. What's your strategy for rate limits or something else?


Axelar is like, yeah, we agree. We have rate limits in audit right now.


Awesome.


At the time, all the other projects had some varying answer of no, no rate limits allowed.


So Axelar ended up winning this vote, which is great because there's no way Axelar can have a bug and a user goes to zero.


But this happened like two weeks too slowly. So there's no other stable in Cosmos.


[Anna Rose] (13:43 - 13:53)


And so people had to switch... I mean, there was probably like a mad dash, like the volume at the moment of the Terra crash. What was it like for you guys in Osmosis at that moment?


[Dev Ojha] (13:54 - 14:16)


So what happened is all of the Luna assets were internal assets.


So Osmosis was the closest DEX that had any other assets you can trade against any of the liquidity. So we actually... there's two serious bugs with Luna as the crash is happening.


One was that there's a Luna runaway mint because the way it worked was that you could like burn UST to get Luna at the peg price.


[Anna Rose] (14:16 - 14:16)


Yeah.


[Dev Ojha] (14:16 - 14:43)


Well, the amount of Luna supply was massively skyrocketing because it grew pretty slowly and is constantly more like Luna UST exchange. But it crashed quickly and tons of UST tried to get to Luna to sell on a CEX.


So these proof-of-stake security of Luna was in danger. So we were actually worried about could this be the first two thirds takeover of a blockchain network ever?


[Anna Rose] (14:42 - 14:43)


Oh, my God. Did it happen?


[Dev Ojha] (14:44 - 15:01)


There was a bunch of Telegram chats where the Luna validators are basically like, we point this out as a problem. And then Luna validators are like, okay, we will halt this chain and upgrade to fix this.


So they choose to upgrade. So they organize a hard fork and halt and just stop allowing staking.


[Anna Rose] (15:01 - 15:01)


Yeah.


[Dev Ojha] (15:02 - 16:45)


And so Luna Classic had that as a thing for years. Then there was a second thing that happened. I'm trying to remember what the cause was, but they basically halted a second time.


I think it was to disable the mint function entirely because they're like, guys, this is not helping anyone. Let's just... we've lost this, let's not let more UST at like three cents become Luna.


And so at that upgrade, they close it. And before they relaunch, somebody... this was not anyone from Osmosis, points out that like, guys, what about the Osmosis DEX? You cannot screw over all the DEX users, but like more exit liquidity.


So they freeze the IBC channels as well.


So that was a huge, a huge relief for us. It was shocking because we didn't help coordinate that at all. They did it internally. And so from that moment, we had a little bit more like calm.


But on our end, what do we do? Well, okay, this is happening. What can we do? We can freeze these pools, these like UST and Luna pools, so if you're an LP, at least you don't go fully to zero.


So we build this logic and then like in an emergency, and then get on calls with the community. Like we have tons of voice calls and recordings to show everyone like, hey, guys, we need to do an emergency hard fork in order to protect these LPs.


While Terra is halted, then we do a basic several series of audits in public on calls with people. We get a bunch of the CosmWasm devs and SDK devs together to help look at this and get an upgrade deployed in like sub 24 hours. 


But this is abnormal. This has never happened in the kind of the history of Cosmos. There's never a token trade security bug either. So nothing merited like emergency upgrade.


[Anna Rose] (16:45 - 16:46)


But this did?


[Dev Ojha] (16:46 - 16:47)


Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (16:47 - 16:56)


Interesting. This, by the way, for listeners who aren't familiar with the history here, Osmosis launches in 2021. This happens in like May 2022, I think, or June.


[Dev Ojha] (16:56- 16:57)


Yeah, sounds right to me.


[Anna Rose] (16:47 - 17:35)


Something like that.


And following that, there was the Nomad hack. There's like... side note, there's like the Tornado Cash case comes up. And then there was the FTX at the end of 2022.


So those are like the big hits. But this Terra crash was the first. It was the first, and it killed major VCs and trading groups. People went to jail and were caught in Montenegro.


They were extradited to their...  I mean, there's so much... this is like big, big disaster for a nascent ecosystem.


[Guillermo Angeris] (17:35 - 17:46)


I feel like this is like a good thing to go ask your like local ChatGPT provider about because I feel like it's a weird moment in history that is kind of hard to synthesize. Nobody has done it super well. But surely...


[Anna Rose] (17:46 - 18:02)


But weirdly, I mean, that cascade of 2022, 2023 was sort of chill. 2024 was sort of chill. And really, it was chill until like end of 2025, when there's another cascade that we have never explored on this show.


This October...


[Dev Ojha] (18:02- 18:02)


10/10.


[Anna Rose] (18:02 - 18:35)


Yeah, it's like... and it caused a whole cascade of activity as well. But in both cases, I guess it was like overinflated ecosystems in a way overinflated dreams getting totally crushed.


I don't know. Sometimes people think it's malicious. I mean, I know with the Terra conversation, there was like claims that it was done on purpose. Same with the 10/10 thing. But I mean, we don't know.


But okay, so Osmosis at this time, so you go through this emergency upgrade and you're still building Osmosis. You're still looking to like..


[Dev Ojha] (18:35 - 19:56)


So our strategy pivots then where before this, we were really focusing on like growing Cosmos, cross-chain standards and a lot of security stuff, Superfluid staking, rate limits, etc. We still take security seriously.


I'm like, okay, rate limits even more important. Maybe we should add those in more areas like for LPs or something, which I can make a tangent. I think that's still separately a thing that should be done for all lending markets and big pools.


Like, hey, everyone should always be able to exit their DeFi position immediately.


But hey, if I'm a lending market with 100 million USDC, maybe don't allow 100 million USDC to be withdrawn immediately. If 100 million USDC wants to pull out, de-expose them from the lending market.


But maybe have a queue, like we have a 24-hour period to like check, was there a security bug? Did North Korea break into someone, or is it like real user activity?


Because that's basically what bridge rate limits are. They're that for bridges. You should have that throughout DeFi as a safety mechanism.


We start thinking about a lot of that. But after Terra crash, we pivot to, okay, there's a unique opportunity here to Terra how to build a massive Cosmos ecosystem.


At the time, I would argue that this was bigger than the Solana ecosystem in 2021. This was before the whole like Sabre, the Macalinao twins, 50 of the projects thing became public.


[Anna Rose] (19:56 - 19:50)


Also, wasn't there like after Terra an exitus to Solana?


[Dev Ojha] (20:00 - 20:39)


The Terra devs went... they did a great job of building a developer ecosystem, shockingly. They went to three camps... I'd say there's three to four camps of them.


One camp was just glorified anchor wrappers that were basically all kind of grift. Then there's a lot of people who went to CosmoWasm. And then they switched to either coming on to Osmosis. We did a lot for this or starting their own Cosmos appchain or going to like Juno or something.


And then a third camp went to Solana.


I don't think we saw anyone from Terra go to Ethereum, but someone could correct me on that.


[Anna Rose] (20:39 - 20:43)


I'm sure there's people who did, but just like in terms of large flows. Yeah.


[Dev Ojha] (20:43 - 20:45)


Yeah. That wasn't the pattern.


[Anna Rose] (20:45 - 20:46)


Makes sense.


[Dev Ojha] (20:45 - 21:39)


So then in a nutshell, we go to like we tried to make it a very integrated DeFi Cosmos strategy for a while. Then we run to a problem that there's not many new appchains coming up that don't try to be their own DEX.


So Celestia launched and one very cool technology stuff, but there wasn't too many after Celestia. After Celestia, we got a massive run up in activity for Osmosis and the like. So we have a problem to confront. Where is demand going to be?


Before Celestia, we're evaluating very carefully. Do we want to do perps or not?


And just fundamentally, we decide perps are a winner-take-all market. There exists Hyperliquid, Drift, etc. Hyperliquid was probably really on to this with strategy.


But we disagree fundamentally on like you need to be max decentralization. We don't want to play the perps game. There's many things you can imagine in your life doing, I'm inspired by privacy. I'm not inspired by building perps. So it's not the game I want to play with my life.


[Guillermo Angeris] (21:39 - 21:39)


Fair enough.


[Dev Ojha] (21:39 - 22:40)


So we're confronted with "what do we do" problem. So we start building this very Cosmos centric or appchain-centric model of the world.


We realize users don't want to think about chains. But there's this weird structure in crypto where you are forced to.


At that time, kind of the only big cross chain wallet was Kepler. Phantom had not added any EVM support. MetaMask didn't add Solana support. That was very recent.


So none of your big wallets were really cross chain.


I mean, technically MetaMask supported the rollups, but it's probably one of the worst integrations ever.


So users want to just trade assets and spot, they don't care what chain they're on. So how do we make a UI that can let you come in with any wallet and then trade across every single chain and hold your funds on all these chains?


So this is the start of this idea called Polaris. We're going to integrate all these bridges, all these DEXs. And once we get Polaris to succeed, we'll do a lot of work to bring the flow on to Osmosis.


[Anna Rose] (22:40 - 22:41)


Is Polaris a wallet?


[Dev Ojha] (23:42 - 22:57)


So this is a part of the problem with Polaris. It was very hard to succinctly describe because it is in some large sense a wallet that you'd have. It'll be this desktop website where it's kind of your exchange and custody solution.


[Anna Rose] (22:57 - 23:01)


But would you still use like Kepler as your signing wallet or something?


[Dev Ojha] (23:01 - 25:05)


Yes, exactly. This ended up being an idea a lot of people converged on, with the biggest difference being... difference of how you do custody and how do you clear the swaps.


Well, we were pretty clear on all these intent systems don't have any liquidity. All these projects are using their own cap table or trying to purchase... like rent liquidity from Wintermute or market makers to be on there rather than, yeah, they're being actually normal people filling as intents.


And we actually saw this in practice until Zcash pumped last year. There's very little fillers for all these intent systems across chains.


But then after Zcash, NEAR Intents started getting a lot more organic feeling, like more participants come in. It was just hard to get the volume you need to onboard market makers to a new system, especially ones unfamiliar to them.


So we start building that out and come around May last year, I start taking a lot more charge on this and try to make this much more privacy directed.


So I set us up on, hey, for building this wallet on your behalf, you come with Kepler, you come with Ethereum. Why don't we keep your funds privately on Namada?


And then we... so we can hold anything on Namada and then you can do a swap in our UI, just like a normal swap, and it'll bridge across to Solana, do a swap there and bridge back.


So to do that, we built this like very complex and advanced MPC wallet system where the MPC wallet would have fully abstract the shielded sync. We'd have the MPC committee like in sort of a multi-party way.


So actually I'll explain... maybe I'll explain shielded sync its own bucket.


So we solve the hard part of privacy, and then we solve the usability because we'd have this committee do all the bridging and swaps on your behalf, but you as a user did one signature from your existing wallet with some like human readable text.


And the MPC wallet would affect... and the backend would follow the text you laid out. So it's like obeys the non-custodial kind of rules.


So this would let you kind of have one anonymity system that could do lending, do private swaps across all these chains, which is great. That's 80-20 of kind of all crypto usage.


[Anna Rose] (25:05 - 25:11)


So was the privacy part the Namada system? Was that where the private things would sit and then the rest would kind of bridge out?


[Dev Ojha] (25:11 - 25:12)


Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (25:12 - 25:13)


Okay.


[Dev Ojha] (25:13 - 25:47)


So we inherited a few problems, though. We inherited a lot of dependency problems. We had to depend on Namada for upgrades and a lot of third party bridges.


And these two problems ended up being kind of fatal for us. Where like a week before launch, one of the bridges that was critical to this working because the market was Solana, this wasn't making commercial sense for them, and it would only make commercial sense if we like massively succeeded. We couldn't guarantee this.


So we couldn't get a proper agreement, so that didn't work out. And there was like an upgrade on Namada that couldn't get shipped.


[Anna Rose] (25:47 - 25:53)


And actually, at this point, is Namada even maintained? I think it's not as the focus of the company.


[Dev Ojha] (25:54 - 26:29)


Yeah. Today, Namada is not. At the time, this wasn't announced and stuff.


So when you see where things go, it kind of makes sense. Because a big problem you have is like when ecosystem's in decline, you just can't bet on all these dependencies being there. This whole appchain thing is really exciting and works great if you have a lot of dependency-less infrastructure.


So that's one of the great things about IBC. It's permissionless. You don't have this problem. But most of the Cosmos bridges from like Solana to Cosmos were not IBC-like, they're multisig-like. So you have to have... that's a big dependency that has to work.


[Anna Rose] (26:29 - 27:02)


Yeah. What has happened to the IBC? There was a time where a lot of different projects and chains... like Ethereum was going to have an IBC or they were trying to push this idea that you would be able to have the IBC on the Ethereum side as well.


Would you say that the tide has changed on that now? Have people just moved away from IBC completely and moved more towards these like... what are they called? Like these bridges that are now very common where you just have locked on both sides and you have a market mechanism to keep people honest.


[Dev Ojha] (27:04 - 27:09)


Yeah. Most of these bridges have ended up devolving to being like very tiny multisigs.


[Anna Rose] (27:10 - 27:10)


Okay.


[Dev Ojha] (27:10 - 27:26)


And then you have a market maker type system to make it fast to transact better than finality. The market maker system on top is fantastic. The fact that the base has ended up being a multisig, basically due to BD and brand reasons, is kind of depressing.


That's the exact opposite of what should be the case.


[Anna Rose] (27:26 - 27:32)


Yeah. So it sounds like theoretically, or like your heart is still with IBC, but I want to know about the reality of IBC.


[Dev Ojha] (27:33 - 27:49)


I actually, I think the heart is still in IBC. I think this is a little bit of a skill issue. This is just like no one owned the go-to-market well of...


The world's full of path dependencies, and I don't think the path dependency of rollup-to-rollup communication or rollup-to-Ethereum is like...


[Anna Rose] (27:50 - 27:50)


Good.


[Dev Ojha] (27:51 - 28:31)


I think it's a path dependency thing, not a fundamental thing with IBC.


So where you are today, I don't know how you directly win other than like permissionless infrastructure is great and should win if you have a lot of permissionless chains.


Now it's kind of we're not seeing a lot of permissionless chains. You're seeing isolated like Corpo chains, a couple of big rollups, Solana... yeah, Tempo Corpo Chains.


So that these Corpo chains are going to be perfectly fine, I think, with like centralized agreements to a multisig. They might even prefer that.


But unfortunately, the multisig bridges won the branding. So now it's somehow a prestigious brand.


So as a Corpo chain, you're going to prefer that.


[Guillermo Angeris] (28:31 - 28:31)


What?


[Dev Ojha] (28:32 - 28:49)


Yeah. I would argue like LayerZero is considered like the good brand for a lot of USDTs and stuff. People want it for their brand.


[Anna Rose] (28:40 - 28:40)


Or Across.


[Dev Ojha] (28:41 - 28:49)


Yeah. Oh, so  Across is a fast bridging thing. It's a market mechanism on top that doesn't care what's underneath.


That's actually fantastic. That can apply to anything.


[Guillermo Angeris] (28:49 - 29:21)


Well, just like it's independent of the underlying layer, right?  Like the market thing is I'll pay some extra fee to do the quick bridging, but somebody else eats both the time risk and also potentially the bridging risk, depending on how you see it, of the underlying layer actually bridging the thing separately.


You also get smart about how you do certain types of bridging and all sorts of nonsense, and that saves you some money, and then you batch up other stuff together, and all sorts of stuff.


But for the user, the high level market mechanism is really nice. It's like, look, man, I don't care if I'm paying 10 bips or something on my bridge. I just want it now.


[Dev Ojha] (29:21 - 29:35)


Yeah. The UX was all, it needs to be fast, like the UX of too many things with is crypto so slow. So I actually think Across is great. I wish they did... we could do more things to make like the fees lower, but this is like, yeah, it's absolutely the right thing. Get markets makers fast.


[Anna Rose] (29:35 - 30:26)


I want to sort of wrap up the story of Osmosis, because I know that you've recently been... I mean, there's news about it, but also there's new work that you've been doing. But I also want to just mention something else kind of that's happening, I think, in tandem, which is like the Terra breakdown.


The 2023 shift, you're sort of focused on a new system. Cosmos does get smaller and smaller. There's a Celestia boost. Celestia launches and it kind of rekindles a lot of excitement about it.


But I remember the narrative after that being like, well, is Cosmos Hub really the center anymore? Is Celestia the center? Would a stablecoin thing be the center? Like, where is the center of Cosmos? Where should it live? So kind of like, what is your postmortem on Cosmos? Maybe it's not over, but where are you at looking at where the ecosystem has landed so far?


[Dev Ojha] (30:28 - 30:41)


So maybe around when Skip took over, I was pushing really hard that like, look, privacy is the thing that matters most. There's this opportunity to make Cosmos the center of privacy and all privacy apps.


[Anna Rose] (30:41 - 30:44)


Because it would fit like the spirit of it in a lot of ways.


[Dev Ojha] (30:44 - 30:55)


And in many ways, a lot of the privacy chain and privacy work in crypto, aside from Zcash, was happening in Cosmos. Like, whether you're building TEEs or not, Secret Network.


[Anna Rose] (30:56 - 30:58)


Yeah, Penumbra was in Cosmos.


[Dev Ojha] (30:58 - 31:44)


Penumbra, fantastic.


And Henry, genius guy, comes to Cosmos, makes his own chain to fix all of the problems that she would think he'd find and get the wallet UX right, get Namada. A lot's happening like here.


And this is pre-Railgun privacy pools.


Okay, I guess when [?] conversations, Railgun has launched. I don't remember the dates of privacy pools. But I think we could really do a great job, got the talent, this is the thing I'm most passionate about. Details happened, couldn't convince along those lines.


I still think this is super valuable. There's several people doing it. Like, Aztec, StarkWare just announced a lot of privacy work.


On the TEE side, there's a lot of people.


But like ZK side, I think these are the two main ones. Well, and like Zcash, of course.




[Anna Rose] (31:44 - 31:45)


So where is Osmosis at today?


[Dev Ojha] (31:45 - 31:57)


So today, we're... basically Cosmos ecosystem is dying. I think aside from Osmosis, almost every chain has announced they're shutting down or switching to another ecosystem.
[Anna Rose] (31:58 - 31:59)


End of an era.


[Dev Ojha] (31:59 - 33:17)


Neutron announced they're shutting down this morning, which was kind of the home of a lot of the permissionless Cosmos devs.


So Osmosis, I think in order to save where Cosmos is, what we need to do is merge Osmosis in the Hub, get the DEX here, get the permissionless Cosmos ecosystem happening here. Skip is, rather Cosmos Labs, the ICF subsidiary, is trying to get enterprises to use the Cosmos stack and try to secure very large BD deals and support agreements.


But in order for that to funnel to Cosmos tokens and the ecosystem, you have to have a way to kind of capture value from that beyond just an enterprise deal.


So we've kind of seen the reliable way to get high amounts of liquidity and volume flowing through to generate revenue is use the DEX. So I think they should... clear thing to do, I think, is acquire the DEX.


And then we rebuild the CosmoWasm ecosystem on the Cosmos Hub. Now it's permissionless and the DEX will be co-located again and like research this from that. And hopefully once that starts succeeding initially, start doing privacy stuff back on the L1.


There's a gap and still getting a good contract environment with native privacy. A lot of people are filling it in now, but I still think it's a gap from where we need to be and where we are today.


[Anna Rose] (33:16 - 33:17)


Interesting.


[Guillermo Angeris] (33:17 - 33:25)


Very quick question before we go too far is where are the actual chains that are currently leaving the Cosmos ecosystem and devs going, out of curiosity?


[Dev Ojha] (33:25 - 33:46)


Devs is kind of an open question. I think it's a kind of in sporadic or like... it's no secret that a lot of devs have just left crypto.


So I wouldn't say there's like a clear nexus of how they've moved the dev side.


Chains, I'd say a lot shut down or a lot went to being on one of the Ethereum rollups or Solana directly.


More so it would be Solana.


[Guillermo Angeris] (33:47 - 33:53)


Makes sense. Yeah, it feels like Solana is the more aligned of the two ecosystems here and has been for a long time.


[Dev Ojha] (33:53 - 34:30)


Yeah. And I think it's kind of natural when you have a bear market, you need a lot of consolidation. Let's not being an isolated appchain where it's hard for capital to flow into.


Where one of the bets of Cosmos is that you could have had a lot of capital flowing into new chains easily. And when I think of like logic brain, this seems like it still feels actually correct.


Well, just when you look at the market reality, that's not been the case. A lot of a lot of like enterprises want specific deals per chain. Getting a custodian for every single chain is a lot of work. It's not a free operation, even though it should be. Explorers are getting a lot better, especially post AI.


[Guillermo Angeris] (34:31 - 34:34)


Possibly that too.


Okay. Anyways, now we can finally switch. Sorry, I didn't mean to hijack.


[Anna Rose] (34:34 - 35:08)


Yeah. So let's now switch over to the work that you've been doing on privacy.


This week, kind of at the start of this episode, we were talking about how the episodes that we did in the past, Fractal and then Osmosis launch. And actually we did a bunch of... we did this privacy in Cosmos series of videos.


I mean, I remember you guys talking about a lot of the ideas for ZK in IBC or ZK and... no, it wasn't in IBC. ZK in the kind of validator stack and all these things.


So kind of how are you tying all of this together? And is Polaris still a thing for you or are you shifting focus?


[Dev Ojha] (35:09 - 37:05)


No. So, okay, I can think I wrap a through line of Polaris to what I'm doing today.


So with Polaris, the dependency risk was too much. Shut down. And I was like, okay, how do we bet on privacy?


I had been talking to a lot of the Solana projects in parallel, a lot of the wallets, the devs and it is post Zcash pump. I talked to all these people before Zcash pump and everyone's like, oh, privacy is cute. Doesn't really matter.


I talked to them during Zcash pump. Perfect. We want privacy now. It's part of our 2026 roadmap.


So then we designed like the shielded system for Solana that would solve.. there this big problem in privacy, UX, which I should talk about. Something called Shielded Sync. We designed a system that would eliminate this on Solana and actually got it built out and demoed.


But there's a really big problem.


I think the dream that really changes the world for what we need to be, especially with like AI global surveillance and whatnot, is to have privacy with no global master key that could somehow be activated to decrypt past transactions.


And in order to make that happen, I think you have to go out about it in a very maximally centralized way. And so I realised I shouldn't think launching a new thing on Solana is the correct strategy for success.


So because of that I ended up dropping that and therefore this Polaris line of work, but the code is actually ready for that.


So that then takes me to what is the most decentralized thing that has privacy at its root and a massive community that would not compromise. That gets you like Zcash.


Then what I've been doing lately, last few months, is putting huge amount of energy, along with other wonderful folks in Zcash. I think you talked to Sean Bowe recently. How do we get Zcash to scale and be incredibly usable?


Well, and so I'm focusing on both of those problems or focused on three problems; Scale, usability and post-quantum [?] of it. And the usability might have a different definition for me than what may be expected.


[Anna Rose] (37:05 - 37:11)


What are you doing with Zcash though? Have you joined like the teams? Are you contributing? What's happening?


[Dev Ojha] (37:11 - 37:27)


So what I'm doing is I've started a new company that's effectively... I mean, if it's socially sanctioned, a core contributor to Zcash. My general goal is make privacy win, do whatever it takes to help kind of privacy anywhere win. I'm focusing almost all the time on Zcash directly.


[Anna Rose] (37:28 - 37:34)


Okay. Why did you choose Zcash and not one of the other privacy systems? Like Aztec just launched?


[Dev Ojha] (37:34 - 37:52)


Yeah. It's a good question. So I love Aztec folks. I don't know, I consider Zac a friend. Zac and Ariel brilliant and doing stuff for an incredible amount of time. I always think about Zac as like huge for inspiration, for just like grit for doing Aztec unwaveringly, I think like seven, eight years.


[Anna Rose] (37:53 - 37:58)


And pro-privacy the whole time. When everyone got scared and cold feet, he stayed with it.


[Dev Ojha] (37:58 - 39:30)


Yeah. Awesome guy.


I think that the thing that matters to really win is to get a lot of the payments, the payment flows to work and build everything on top of that.


And then I also think that you either need to be co-located where all the users are... or so like making a new system is really hard, or you have to be something really pure.


So one of the things that is always shocking to me is I was really inspired by some parts of Zcash of like when Zcash pumped, privacy everywhere became the thing.


And I think that's only possible because what winning looks like is not like, hey, all payments have this like privacy property. Even if that's key for like freedom. Winning to me looks like we've inspired self-owning your data across the entire Internet.


Like you have local LLMs. All your data is only owned by you. Never shared. We start getting people to just think about metadata leakage in everything they do. Self-signing.


I don't see a path for anything that's not super pure winning to inspire that wide movement.


So I think if Zcash wins or Zcash like really improves a ton, this has this ability to inspire a lot outside of just crypto. Whereas it feels like very programmable and finance heavy, it's a muddled message that doesn't spread as far.


I'm always so shocked at like how successful and impactful Bitcoin is despite like... look, you can barely even pay on this. The thing they got right was just that like the security of it. It's not had an incident.


[Anna Rose] (39:30 - 39:31)


And its message is very pure.


[Dev Ojha] (39:31 - 39:31)


Yeah. 


[Anna Rose] (39:31 - 39:39)


Even if behind the scenes there's like a lot of random miners and blah, blah, blah, there's a lot of stuff.


[Guillermo Angeris] (39:40 - 39:46)


[?] But it is like a messiahic message, right? It's just like brought forth from the messiah whatever.


[Dev Ojha] (39:47 - 40:32)


And I also think that like it's really key that we get crypto native currencies to have this, because if you want a privacy property that's really big, it should be something that's kind of digitally enforced, similar to like in order to be inspiring, it must be like unwavering.


You can't have a bunch of asterisks of like your privacy can be broken if X, Y, Z conditions are met. That's impossible for anything bridged from the real world. It's on digital native. If it's, you have digital gold or if you have like Paxos gold, it doesn't matter what anyone tells you, whatever system, magical systems you build, Paxos can like say, you must dox everything or else you cannot use this.


So you have to get a digital first system to be inspiring and make this whole movement.


[Guillermo Angeris] (40:32 - 40:44)


Okay. Yeah. So, I guess maybe here's a bunch of questions is, number one is where is Zcash today? How usable is it? Are people using? I remember there was a bit of a run up on it. There's a whole thing.


[Anna Rose] (40:44 - 40:46)


There's also like a wallet split that's just happened with Zashi and Zodl.


[Guillermo Angeris] (40:47 - 40:47)


Oh, interesting. I didn't hear about this.
[Guillermo Angeris] (40:48 - 41:08)


I mean like... oh man.


And then number two is, okay, what is your dream for Zcash? Like let's say you got today to make the philosophical things come true. You wave a wand and... what would that be?


But let's start first with where the hell is Zcash today? I actually have no idea. I mean, no clue like whatsoever right now.


[Dev Ojha] (41:08 - 41:21)


Okay. So where are we today with Zcash? Number one problem is kind of usability of this.


So you probably have talked about a couple of times in the podcast, like why private systems suck to use, due to this thing called Shielded Sync.


[Anna Rose] (41:21 - 42:31)


I mean, specifically the Zcash model had this transparent and shielded versions. You had to sort of move and decide where your tokens would live.


And I think what I understood from Sean, and we just recently did kind of this history of those wallets and systems.


So I don't think I would actually point people to that episode if they want to hear that. But the idea that every time you wanted to sync your wallet, you'd have to kind of download the entire chain. And you'd have to go through all... you're running all of the transactions that have happened in the past, meaning like... and I've experienced it where you're trying to open up your wallet you haven't used in a while and it takes forever for it to be usable.


Like you can see it like syncing and you're like, whoa, this is like hours and hours and hours of time.


So that's been a big issue with that particular system. Now, other privacy systems have other tradeoffs and some of them have been faster and some of them maybe like when they just launched, they just didn't have that much activity. So they didn't have that kind of delay. They didn't have these long sync times.


I mean, I don't think Aztec's built in the same way. So I don't know that its wallets would have the same issue.


[Dev Ojha] (42:31 - 43:17)


If you wanted the same privacy guarantee, it would. Aztec does this trick that's actually... it's pretty clever for if I know I'm talking to you or I've paid you before, like somehow my wallet can figure this out.


I don't know, imagine I have an address book, I paste this in. There's a quick way to re-sync.


Now, I'm unfamiliar with how this address book work in practice. Is there a public directory of all the addresses, and it's just not that many, so it's quick, or you enter it... I actually don't know the answer to that.


But once I know your address, I can then find all payments between me and you rather easily, which is a very cool property.


The way they do it breaks privacy for now, but can be fixed with this technique called Private Information Retrieval. It's actually kind of pretty centric to what I want to do with, and have been doing in Zcash.


[Anna Rose] (43:17 - 43:17)


PIR.


[Dev Ojha] (43:17 - 43:17)


PIR, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (43:18 - 43:22)


I think we're actually planning an episode on that particular topic, so.


[Dev Ojha] (43:22 - 43:34)


Perfect. Yeah, it's one of the most exciting things where it's shockingly usable. We've been doing it for things that are more than a 1000X the size of all Zcash transactions to date, and it works great.


[Guillermo Angeris] (43:34 - 43:34)


Very cool.


[Dev Ojha] (43:35 - 44:27)


So the problem in a nutshell is basically, you have to download all these things, all these transactions. So we need to change the payment flows and in order for you to no longer need to download every transaction on the chain. But we also need you to be... we need a second property where I could fix the first one, because what are we solving for?


If I pay you, how do you figure you got paid? And there's like two simple answers. Because we're a private payment system, so no one knows who it's from, who it's to, or how much it is, easy answer one, you download every single transaction in the chain and check if it's a payment to you.


But that doesn't scale for obvious reasons.


Second easy answer is, well, why don't I just tell you I paid you? I can just send you a Signal message that, hey, Anna, I sent you $10 for coffee. And that would solve this.


But there's a problem.


[Anna Rose] (44:27 - 44:29)


Well, that's not guaranteed that you did it, right?


[Dev Ojha] (44:29 - 43:34)


No, it can be guaranteed. I can send a link that you click, your wallet opens the link and it's for sure received.


The problem you get in there is two big problems. One is, what if this like communication channel fails? My phone breaks, your phone breaks. Do we have money lost in the middle?


[Anna Rose] (44:48 - 44:29)


Oh, you have to be there to receive it somehow.


[Dev Ojha] (44:29 - 46:34)


Yeah. Or you have a central server who receives it, which is how every messaging app works, and you try to do a bunch of work to hide the data you pulled from the central server.


Second big problem, when you want to... let's say you've lost everything, like your phone's broken and you have your 12-word mnemonic, you want to go put it into a new phone or a new laptop and go recover your funds.


Well, if you find out you got paid off of Signal messages or some messaging app in the background, how do you get your money back? It's no longer 12 words, everything.


So we fix both of these problems using this Private Information Retrieval trick. The idea is actually quite similar to Aztecs, which I'm familiar with it, where we segment the problem into two camps.


How do we do the first payment, the first time I ever pay you, and build a way for that to be recoverable?


So when you recover from your mnemonic, we've built a system so that you can figure out you got a first payment from me. Second thing we do is for all subsequent payments, if we've talked to each other once in the past, we can kind of agree on a key, and we can agree on a kind of infinite sequence of random numbers, I call these tags.


And for my second payment to you, I'll use like the second tag in the sequence. Third payment, I'll use third tag. Your wallet, when recovering, can just know to look for this tag because it knows what the tag numbers will be, but it needs to find, is there any transaction on the blockchain with this tag?


So only me and you know what numbers correspond to us, but then any node can index what are the tags it's seeing, and we build a way to privately ask that question. The way you privately ask the question is PIR.


[Anna Rose] (46:37 - 46:47)


Okay. This isn't what... I'm just trying to remember, because like we talked about this like pruning the nullifier set that Ian and Sean have worked on. That's something else, right?


[Dev Ojha] (46:47 - 47:04)


That's an unrelated. So that's a cool problem. That's like long term. I think that's further out in the problem stack for usability, but it's fantastic because there's another problem in Zcash systems. Every single transaction you do makes the entire state of the blockchain bigger.


[Anna Rose] (47:04 - 47:10)


With these nullifiers, which are very small, but eventually these things can add up.


[Dev Ojha] (47:10 - 47:59)


Exactly. A billion nullifiers.... you can get to two billion nullifiers with a billion transactions. So that would cost you 64 gigabytes of data. So if we get to hundreds of billions of transactions, then we get to very big numbers of database sizes.


So we need to long term solve that as well so our nodes like stay very usable and Tachyon is actually a very brilliant solution to this.


And then we have a second problem, which we need to kill the Shielded Sync. We need to kill the Shielded Sync in a way that still lets you recover all your funds.


So the latter is where this PIR stuff comes in. So you can recover from your 12 words, find all your funds and still spend money. You don't have to have any of this Signal messaging or off-chain messaging.


[Anna Rose] (47:59 - 48:16)


But are these kind of related? Because like one is about the bloat of the entire system and indexing it, or like being able to retrieve information.


And then this one is like these do seem sort of similar. Would you have to adjust the PIR in order to work with the new system?


[Dev Ojha] (48:16 - 50:09)


What's funny is this came up for the kind of the first time Sean and I talked about this. Actually brilliant. I've just talked to a couple of people and no one's like actually asking this connection.


So Sean told me about how there's evolving nullifiers. We have to kind of update the nullifier every epoch.


This PIR thing is very clever, but it does have a big cost. There's a reason this has not been done kind of everywhere. It's that what's happening? It's kind of the server has this database, the client is asking for some entry in the database, but the server has to tell the client this entry without knowing what the client asked for.


In order to do that, the server has to do some math operation on every single database element.


So normally, if I ask for... I've got a terabyte database, I ask for an entry, it's very quick, depending on what level of abstraction you use. It's like O of 1 or log n, like some constant amount of time, basically.


Here, no, it grows their database size. But the server grows the database size, but the anonymity also gets better the more entries there are.


So for the evolving nullifiers, updating nullifier question, it's not super clear to me why you wouldn't want to update this every hour other than like it makes a lot of client queries. It's more CPU work... Sorry, not even more client queries. It's more server work to do a lot of update proofs.


So it's kind of funny we have these, or you can make it really long so you have less client interactions, less bandwidth.


So we have slightly different usages of timeboxing history between this PIR stuff and these evolving nullifiers. The word is oblivious syncing services.


So we need to make these two chunks of time the same and make these kind of shared across both systems.


[Anna Rose] (50:10 - 50:28)


I'm going to be doing an episode soon on verifiable databases. And it's like doing kind of information, like proving something about a database without knowing what's in it in a way. And I'm wondering, in the Zcash specific context, is this a technique that could be used here or is it already happening?


[Guillermo Angeris] (50:28 - 51:03)


That one's more like, I think, if I recall correctly, that one is more like providing a ZK proof of correctness that the thing has been correctly run, and not revealing the underlying data.


This is like the opposite case where it's like you don't trust the person who hosts the database. So in that one, you don't trust the person who is to correctly give you the output, but you do trust them on the private data.


This is the opposite. This is like you trust them to give you the output because you can verify the app in some other way, but you don't trust them to not like leak what record you are looking at.


[Anna Rose] (51:04 - 51:04)


I see.


[Guillermo Angeris] (51:04 - 51:10)


Right. Because just the fact that you are searching for a specific record in this database is leaking information about who you are.


[Anna Rose] (51:10 - 51:11)


It's leaking something. Makes sense.


[Guillermo Angeris] (51:11 - 51:14)


Right. Whereas like in the other case, it's like more about general queries, like SQL queries.


[Anna Rose] (51:14 - 51:14)


Nice. 


[Dev Ojha] (51:15 - 51:25)


Okay, so we ended up with like how do you... we tied off like PIR connects, let's make this PIR database time the same as the oblivious syncing service time to get both goals solved for scaling.


[Anna Rose] (51:25 - 51:48)


And where are we at? I know that in Tachyon there is... I mean, I don't know if this nullifier kind of pruning, not non pruning, pruning. They said it's not pruning. So I was like, okay, okay, okay. Technique to avoid pruning the nullifier set, but actually shrinking it potentially.


I don't know if that's actually going to be included in Tachyon, but is the PIR stuff going to be included?


[Dev Ojha] (51:49 - 52:48)


Okay. So this is, in other words, an evolving target. The dream is, end of this year, we get these evolving nullifier proofs and oblivious syncing service and the PIR stuff in order to give basically a fully unblocked scale.


But for scaling, the biggest bottleneck for scaling is you kill off shielded sync, that you can now get your final transactions without downloading everything in history, because then it's just a straightforward like, how do you scale consensus to scale TPS directly?


So we're trying to hit like getting several hundred shielded TPS onchain this year. So one of the biggest unlocks is one of the precursors for the oblivious syncing service and all the Tachyon work is recursive proofs, recursive SNARKs for everything. So that's for sure needed.


And we're trying to get like everything together, PIR, oblivious sync and these evolving nullifiers to get kind of this dream system of no more shielded sync. It's kind of the theme of this Manhattan project for privacy.


[Anna Rose] (52:49 - 53:09)


In that interview with Sean, though, we also talked about what an upgrade would look like for users. And he said that like there's parts of Tachyon that will really fundamentally change the way these wallets work. 


So it's like I think this is a pretty major upgrade coming.


[Dev Ojha] (53:10 - 53:30)


Yeah. So, okay, I can tell you a little bit more about this. This comes down to the problem of how do you make the first payment?


So I kind of sketched verbally, maybe not super convincing, that if we've paid once before and you can figure out the first payment from me to you, you can then find every subsequent payment.


So now we have to solve how do you find out that I paid you for the first time?


[Anna Rose] (53:30 - 53:33)


In this case, you want this to be find out-able. It's like you're not...


[Dev Ojha] (53:33 - 53:40)


Yeah, I want Dev pays... Alice pays Bob. Bob needs to find out that Alice paid him.


[Anna Rose] (53:40 - 53:43)


Okay. This is solving for this like Signal problem, yeah.


[Guillermo Angeris] (53:44 - 53:57)


Right. Like that.. now it's like, okay, assuming we have the first payment, we're good, solved by this like previous PIR, I believe is the name that you had it for it.


Now the question is, okay, cool. But we still have to find the first payment, bro. Can we fix that?


[Dev Ojha] (53:57 - 55:32)


Okay. So here's basically the options that have no risk. No risk basically means there's no intermediate state that can have no fund that can lead to funds lost. Then there's things that can like trade off [?].


So the first way is Alice wants to pay Bob. Bob sends Alice a dynamic address. So it's an address that's unique to this payment, and I include like 32 random bytes.


So if you're familiar with, I was calling these tags earlier. Bob tells Alice basically, pay me with this tag. And Bob can know to look for that tag of PIR if he has to recover from mnemonic.


So then Alice has a payment at that tag, Bob's constantly looking for that tag to figure out, did he get paid?


That's kind of way one where you have a dynamic address or dynamic QR code. We're at a conference, you scan my QR code, I give you a different QR code. It's kind of the idea.


That flow, you can also... back to this Alice-Bob example, where Bob gives Alice a dynamic thing. That's also the normal flow of invoicing. Like if I invoice a company, I say like, here's this like bill, pay me $100. And here's this invoice ID. And it's kind of the same thing of, here's this custom data for where I want to get paid. That's another way to model this.


Two mental models, invoices. Second one is sending you a unique address.


Second solution is, well, Bob can recover funds if he's talked to Alice before. Okay, we're in a situation where he hasn't talked to Alice.


Well, what if there is a third party?


[Anna Rose] (55:33 - 55:35)


Eve. No, but Eve's always the bad one.


[Dev Ojha] (55:35 - 55:36)


Yeah. Let's start with R.


[Anna Rose] (55:36 - 55:37)


Charlie or something.


[Dev Ojha] (55:38 - 55:40)


R for Relayer. So this is third party, Royce, who's...


[Anna Rose] (55:41 - 55:41)


Robert. 


[Guillermo Angeris] (55:41 - 54:41)


Raven.


[Dev Ojha] (55:41 - 55:42)


Raven. Raven. Okay, Raven's a cooler name.


[Anna Rose] (55:42 - 55:42)


Raven's cooler.


[Dev Ojha] (55:42 - 56:58)


Okay. So Bob's talked to Raven before.


So in Bob's address, he also puts Raven's address. Raven's this relayer.


So Alice wants to pay Bob. Alice hasn't talked to Bob before, but Raven promises to always kind of be online. So Alice talks to Raven or Alice sends like a micropayment to Raven called, like, I don't know, a 10th of a cent or something. And then says like forward my public key to Bob on the channel Bob can see.


So Alice talks to Raven, Raven sends a payment to Bob, like a micropayment call it again, like fraction of a cent. And then Raven sends a proof to Alice that, Hey, I communicated your key to Bob. So Bob will be able to recover this.


Now go send the full money to Bob. So now let's say Bob lost his keys and has to recover from mnemonic. Well, Bob's already solved the Raven communication somehow in the past.


So Bob will see Alice's public key because Raven told Bob Alice's public key, Raven gave a proof to Alice that she did this. So now Bob will then be able to find Alice's payment.


So this is kind of like you have a relayer in your address somehow.


[Guillermo Angeris] (56:58 - 57:05)


It's playing the... it's very similar to me to... It's akin to the role of the sync server in Local-First software, right?


[Dev Ojha] (57:05 - 57:07)


Exactly. I thought... Oh, that's a brilliant analogy.




[Anna Rose] (57:07 - 57:07)


That's a cool link.
[Guillermo Angeris] (57:07 - 57:42)


It only keeps track of the deltas, and it doesn't matter whether it's online or not. You can switch to any sync server you want or whatever.


But the point is like, you need some mediation between two nodes, which you don't know will be online constantly. So it's nice to have this as a service. That's actually really fucking cool specifically for like enabling this like cold start problem.


That's brilliant.


I was going to say something much dumber, which is you can also just have ephemeral data, which runs on the blockchain, you have like a data availability style layer, and then you do this, but it's exactly the same service.


I mean, fundamentally the point is here, of course, it's much more general than like it needs to run on the chain itself.


[Dev Ojha] (57:42 - 57:43)


Oh, that's kind of cool.


[Guillermo Angeris] (57:44 - 57:58)


One difference with the chain version, that's kind of interesting is you don't need to provide a proof that you have sent the public key to somebody else.


It's like the chain itself, the fact that there's inclusion in it is enough to provide the proof, right?


[Dev Ojha] (57:58 - 58:15)


Oh, that's true. Because you could have the Raven to Bob communication, something not be encrypted and you see that they sent... Alice encrypts the data, her pubkey. And so she sees that her encrypted data is used.


If Raven doesn't re-encrypt that works.


[Guillermo Angeris] (58:15 - 58:27)


Yeah, I think so. And then there's... also in general, you could just have the chain itself like functions as its own, like I have sent this thing to Bob because Bob can obviously access the chain over some two week period or something, right? For example.


[Dev Ojha] (58:27 - 58:38)


That could also work, but we're assuming an onlineness where the card of the goal is we want to have no online assumption of Bob. We want Bob to be like, he thought things, everything's working a year later, it has to go.


[Guillermo Angeris] (58:38 - 58:42)


I see. I see. So you specifically want like... you actually want the long-term this year.


That's right. Yeah. Okay.  Cool.


[Dev Ojha] (58:43 - 59:34)


Oh, there's one other observation I forgot to make where I've been saying stuff in terms of Alice pays Bob, but if Bob pays Alice the first time, like the first name in them is from Bob to Alice, Bob can always find that really easily. So we don't have to solve that problem, and you figure that out with nullifiers.


Because Bob can figure out when did he spend his nullifier. So therefore Bob can always find transactions where he's the first payment. So all of our problem is just figure out when the first time you receive money from someone.


And this is the biggest case where this is a problem is like, Hey, here's my address on Twitter, please donate to me. That's kind of the use case that's really hard, which the relayer or Sync, local sync server solves because everything else is kind of easy.


It's not a big... Zodl, the app already gives a custom address for every payment.


[Anna Rose] (59:34 - 59:41)


Zodl being the new Zashi, the new wallet.


Is that already live? Have they launched yet?


[Dev Ojha] (59:41 - 59:41)


Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (59:41 - 59:46)


Okay. Because I knew they had done the company, but I didn't know if the product was already out.


[Dev Ojha] (59:46 - 59:48)


Your app should just rebrand now. Like there should be some...


[Anna Rose] (59:49 - 59:51)


 Oh, really. Zashi should be... oh, wow.


[Dev Ojha] (59:51 - 59:52)


Yeah. This should be live. It happened to my phone a few days ago.


[Anna Rose] (59:53 - 1:00:03)


Okay. Crazy.


In terms of the work that you're doing, like you're now contributing to it, but is your company... like are you working on a specific part or a project?


[Dev Ojha] (1:00:04 - 1:03:46)


So I'm basically working on whatever I think it's like the biggest to make the UX of this all in. So there's a shielded sync component, which is really big, and there's two other kind of big things.


The second big thing is the UX of Zcash. Zcash is a proof of work blockchain with 75 second block time. So I've basically been making a proposal to first drop this 25 seconds.


And then we want to be doing fun work to like, one, keep dropping block time, but over time, figure out some way to make a pre-conf like thing from the miners, because a lot of UX just needs like a good one conf guarantee or even like something zero conf that's better... that has like, for instance, we have 80% of hash power saying, Hey, I promise I'll include this. No slashing if I don't.


That's good enough for most $10 payments or like... and then you can start getting really good UXs.


Right now, the problem for MasterCard, MasterCard has like a rule where if in testing you take more than, I think it's like 1.5 seconds to like respond, you don't get accepted as a credit card, because your network has to be fast.


So a 25 second block time card already blocks you from being a credit card. It's too slow. 


But these pre-confs could now start doing that for like small, even medium-sized payments.


And now we can get kind of the UX we need, the whole meme of you don't want to wait an hour paying for coffee. Okay, let's go solve that. Let's go make like... there's a bunch of different solutions. You got to go to discuss a bunch of tradeoffs to decide which one, but then make that happen.


And the third thing is getting Zcash post-quantum.


So what's kind of cool is you can first be post-quantum recoverable, which means that if a quantum computer came tomorrow, we can just freeze the shielded pools and you could be able to recover your funds. We can make a new STARK that correctly proves you own these funds.


So the update you need to make that work in Zcash is tiny. It's just a super small wallet update.


So where we are right now, even if we drop block times like 10 seconds or even 25 seconds, it's too slow to be a credit card.


So we'll have to do some sort of pre-confirmation tricks or finality gadget. There's a ton of ways you can do this. 


You could imagine there's some committee of miners based on hash power, like the trailing hash power of the last six hours, and if two thirds of these miners say, Hey, we'll include this transaction in the next block, then you as a user are pretty convinced you will be included in the next block.


So there's a bunch of ideas of this form, or you could be inspired by Solana Shreds. There's no consensus on how to do it. There's a bunch of ideas.


So after we dropped the block time, it'll be time to discuss those to figure out how do you get much better UXs for users.


And then the third big problem we have with all of crypto is how do you get post-quantum? So to be post-quantum has two parts.


We can very easily get your funds to be post-quantum recoverable, meaning that quantum computer exists tomorrow, we can freeze the pool and then you can still safely recover your funds, spend them in the post-quantum shielded pool, also without revealing your balance.


So that's quantum recoverability. It's a really tiny wallet update. Actually, this should happen pretty soon. And so then as long as you touch your funds after the wallet update, it's safe. The quantum computer cannot make you lose your money.


The second thing is making a new shielded pool that's post-quantum. That one we actually have more time for, thanks to quantum recoverability. And so over the next two years, I'm sure we get fully post-quantum shielded pool.


First, we get all the recursive proofs working in the easier mode with the curves, and we track the high scale this year, the dream is we get to 500 TPS, shielded sync fully killed, and much faster UX for actually running transactions.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:47 - 1:04:04)


Going back to like you originally were a ZK researcher. Do you think, is ZK solved? Now everything we've talked about with you is engineering. It's like implementing these things and the things around the ZK systems.


Do you feel like... is it finished?  Or do you think there'll be some breakthroughs?


[Dev Ojha] (1:04:05 - 1:04:43)


I don't think the zkVMs have gotten it right yet, where there's a huge amount of work that went into the modern CPU chip. Like how do you make the modern CPU so fast? And this involves a lot of like instruction set architecture, SIMD, etc. And I feel like this is a huge amount of complexity in design.


Maybe if you wear your theory hat, it's all just constants. If you wear like the art of making CPU chips, no, this is like 40 years of work, if not more.


The Apple M1 chip was a huge leap over what existed before.


[Anna Rose] (1:04:44 - 1:04:48)


And you feel like zkVMs need to achieve something similar in that way?


[Dev Ojha] (1:04:49 - 1:05:06)


Yeah. I don't have a similar level of CPU type optimisation. How do we do these bulk operations really quickly has happened yet. Or it's obvious and people care about and work on it. But I still think there's a ways to go.


I'm actually curious about your take on this, Guillermo, I feel like you're also even closer to most zkVM teams than I am.


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:05:07 - 1:05:55)


No, I mean, I agree. I think like zkVMs are... I mean, I have a lot of thoughts about the exact mechanics of zkVMs, how we do them today, why they work, why they don't work, whether we've even adapted them to the systems that we're proving.


It's very weird that we spend a bunch of time compiling down to some random language and then use that to compile back down to something else.


And then only after that do we compile to some like weird thing, which then compiles to a PCS. And I'm like, what the fuck are we doing here? It's like six layers of abstraction for the sake of abstraction, essentially.


And I get it because you have to balance out doing it quickly using developer tooling and all this stuff. But it's like, come on, do we really expect like in the long arc of history, we're going to have the six layers of abstraction, each of which are just not actually contributing that much and eating through this entire stack? The answer is no.


[Dev Ojha] (1:05:56 - 1:06:40)


We have very little PMF of ZK outside of blockchains, especially as recursive stuff that's high speed.


This client stuff is a very different problem for privacy. And then for all these onchain environments, you're constrained by what the blockchain support and there's not been much demand for, here is very long compute that I'm going to need repeatedly run. I'm going to be willing to pay for a six month even research project to optimise that.


The closest real domain we have had outside of blockchain that I can think of is the Google age verification thing that they spun up an internal team to like, hey, let me scan your ID card and give a ZKP that you're above 18 or whatever from real passport.


And that's like a very small client side proof. It's not the same ballpark of zkVMs.


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:06:40 - 1:07:37)


Yeah, I agree. I think there's going to be a big... there's still to me a big question about really, really big computation. 


I mean, there's always the joke of like Intel would make bigger and better chips and it's not because like there was an obvious immediate need for bigger and better chips. Just like someone would figure out something to do with the bigger and better stuff.


But I agree, right now, the main reason that people are not using or are using ZK that is not blockchain related is essentially these privacy preserving, like ID-like technologies, which obviously I have some thoughts about. Some good, some bad, but yeah.


So, okay. Anyways, given all of this, I still have the big question Dev for you, which is let's say you could wave the magic wand and just like have the stuff for this year, next year, even a year after done, and it could be whatever you wanted, what would Zcash or privacy-enabled technologies, or what does it look like? What's like Vitalik-style manifesto level vision that you would expect happen here?


[Dev Ojha] (1:07:38 - 1:09:46)


Okay. So first let me focus on Zcash, maybe the manifesto. Zcash is in the hands of like billions of people on the planet where we're using it for everyday like private payments. So this means thousands of TPS in the chain. No one's mentioning this like quantum-ware anymore. We're just done with it. It's all solved.


And then it's all fast. Like same way no one talks about what's the clearing time of a credit card, no one thinks about the block time of Zcash. This is not a property we have with like even Ethereum today. Hit on the 12 seconds repeatedly. We need to fix that. It's like all of your normal actions, super quick.


And so that's Zcash the chain. And then maybe more broadly, societally, I want to be building the world where you own kind of all your digital data and you always do proofs about your data besides like what's the definition of sharing it.


I even dream of the world where there's a Twitter fork or Twitter competitor where the length of time your eyeballs spend on a given tweet is not Twitter's data, it's your data that talks to your local LLM and your local LLM queries some database to say like, here's the rough shape of content I want.


And so I dream of this world where you have all of your data locally owned and all the sort of global interactions gets privacy. Even more concrete than that, that's we probably are actually going to do.


There's all sorts of ways if you do subscriptions, like, hey, I need to pay for an RPC node, et cetera. And importantly, an important part of subscriptions for any API services that does rate limits, we're going to get... all of these need to be private of, okay, I'm going to provision or pay for a thousand queries per day from, I don't know, call it, ZK Infura or ZK Alchemy.


Okay. I can do every single query from an anonymous IP so it can't be correlated, and attached is some data that's privacy preserving that lets ZK Alchemy know that I'm obeying the rate limits, but they have no idea which user I am.


So we're going to need like ZK subscriptions for SaaS stuff all across stack. We have private P2P anonymity solutions and you own all your own data, all your subscriptions fully private. The merchants, whatever, can get their security properties they need. Usually they need rate limits to provide service, but not know who you are.


[Anna Rose] (1:09:46 - 1:11:42)


I think it's so important and so timely. I don't know if you're hearing, but all of these companies that people have been relying on for years and years, their communication rails in certain cases, are making decisions post you signing up for them about what they're going to do with your data.


And I don't know, like somebody recently shared that like Instagram, their chat apparently had been encrypted. It's going to be unencrypted soon.


And it's like, I don't use the Instagram chat much. So I personally don't care. But I know other people do. They keep in touch with friends there. And that's not a choice they get to make.


And the reason is like for AI training, and you're just like, fuck you guys. Excuse my language. But all of those people, people I know are just going to be fed into this machine and they did not... like they were already signing up maybe to be advertised to, maybe they had agreed implicitly to that. Like okay, I'm going to get shitty ads. That's the free software model.


But they hadn't signed up to be eaten by the AI machine. And I think that's really sick.


I think we're too late to be honest. But I hope we can build stuff soon. I mean, also, I mean, I think I've mentioned this on the show before, but medical data, how is it that these industries that pride themselves on privacy are like so incredibly unsafe and all of your medical data should be in your own possession? Why is it sitting on servers in different places? It doesn't make any sense.


That's my end rant.


Dev, thanks for coming on the show, man. Catching up with us, sharing the story of Osmosis, sharing the story of sort of your return to privacy. I'm so happy to see you in our channels, be more active again, because I feel like you were more off in Cosmosland for a while. So, yeah, welcome back into the fold.


Or I guess you've always been here. I shouldn't say that.


[Dev Ojha] (1:11:43 - 1:11:45)


Way more now than before. This is...


[Anna Rose] (1:11:45- 1:11:45)


Okay. Good.


[Dev Ojha] (1:11:46 - 1:11:48)


I truly believe this is the most important problem to work on.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:48 - 1:11:49)


Very good.


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:11:50 - 1:11:50)


Very, very cool.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:51 - 1:11:58)


All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Hector and Tanya.


And to our listeners, thanks for listening.