Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Tarun and I chat with Mert Mumtaz. Mert is the co-founder and CEO at Helius and someone who is known on Twitter as one of the most vocal supporters of the Solana ecosystem. In our conversation, we cover Mert's connection to Solana, how he got his start living through the crash at the end of 2022, Solana's recent regrowth, and discuss its positioning in the larger blockchain ecosystem today.


We then take some time to do a survey of ZK projects emerging in the Solana ecosystem, covering ways that ZK is being used for scaling, privacy as well as in the base layer to enable new functionality. This is something I've wanted to cover for a while now, so really glad I got a chance to dive in.


We wrap up with a short chat about the past, present and future of speculative assets, the impact of memecoins and what could be next. Now obviously this is a little out of character for the show. We almost never touch these topics. But since we do in this episode, I will make the note that this is in no way financial advice. Nothing we say here should influence any personal choices you make about investing, obviously.


Now, before we kick off, I do want to just let you know about the zkSummit. zkSummit13 is coming up. It's happening on May 12th in Toronto. This is the second time we bring the zkSummit to North America, the first being all the way back in 2019 when we did one in San Francisco. If you've never been to a zkSummit, I definitely recommend checking it out. This is the spot to find out about the latest research, the newest applications, to find out who are the most important players in ZK today. It's also a wonderful way to get to know sort of the larger ZK community. The application to attend is now open. If you'd like to apply to speak, you can do so in the same form. The speaker application deadline is March 15. Generally, I recommend applying early. We do expect this event to sell out and tickets are limited, speaker slots are even more limited. So do get your application in early and we'll get in touch with you very shortly. Links, as always, are in the show notes and I hope to see you there.


Now here is our episode with Mert.


So today, Tarun and I are here with Mert Mumtaz, co-founder and CEO at Helius. He's also a Solana researcher and a fellow podcaster. Welcome to the show, Mert.


Mert Mumtaz [02:49] Hello. Thanks for having me.


Anna Rose [02:51] Hey, Tarun. How are you doing?


Tarun Chitra [02:52] Good. I feel like I'm outnumbered by Canadians for once.


Anna Rose [02:56] True. Canadians who don't live in Canada anymore.


Tarun Chitra [02:59] Yeah. Canadians who don't live in Canada. Right?


Anna Rose [03:00] Nice. So I've been wanting to do a survey about the ZK projects in the Solana ecosystem for a while now. I feel like most of the ZK action we cover on the show tends to be either in academic ZK research, it's on L1s dedicated to ZK, or I would say, like a large part of the ZK research out there has been in the Ethereum ecosystem with rollups, ZK apps, ID, games, all of this stuff.


But recently I started to hear more and more projects sort of popping up from -- like in Solana that are at least touching ZK. And I'm kind of excited about that. I've been wanting to explore some sort of ZK X Solana for a while. So this is why I wanted to have you on, and hopefully you can help us get a little insight into what's going on over there.


Mert Mumtaz [03:52] Yeah. I'll do my best. Not an expert, but we do work on a lot of the teams that support it. So let's see what I got.


Anna Rose [04:01] Cool. Before we do that, though, let's get to know you a bit. Tell us a bit about yourself. And I know you're one of the people who went through kind of the Solana crash of 2022. So I'd love to hear a little bit about what -- kind of where you got your start and maybe what it was like to go through something like that.


Mert Mumtaz [04:18] Sure. Before that incident, I was at Coinbase, and I believe I was one of the first two Canadian folks actually hired by Coinbase.


Anna Rose [04:30] This is the theme.


Mert Mumtaz [04:30] So they had just set up their office, and there I worked on a lot of stuff, but mostly they have an internal system called Ledger, which keeps track of all balance changes across all chains and transaction histories and all this. And so I actually worked a lot on Ethereum, Polygon, some early Optimism stuff, and then even Avalanche. Solana was basically what I worked on on my own time because I was curious. I was even curious about Polkadot and a bunch of different weird things, even briefly looking at Algorand.


So I was already building on all these chains on my own time, just basically trying to see what is possible with this tech. I had been in crypto from a, let's say investor point of view for a little bit, but not necessarily hands-on engineering wise. As I was doing that, I built a lot of stuff on Solana and those generally tend to get the most traction. These are all basic stuff, like Solana didn't really have any block explorers back in the day in absolutely zero data analytics sites. So I would write my own indexers and then try to see if people were lying that were just posting on Twitter during the NFT season.


You know, they would say something like, oh, this mint is going super fast. And then I would write a script and be like, well actually you have 99% of the supply. And so it was very sketchy stuff. And while doing that, one, I noticed that the developers on Solana were super friendly, and I just found more of a community there than anywhere else personally. 


The second point is that I noticed how difficult it was to build on Solana. So there was no concept of -- well, I mean there is a concept of an ABI, which is on EVM, but on Solana that wasn't standardized. And also people were pretty cutthroat. And what that meant was to understand what the data looked like, you'd have to reverse engineer it by very obscure means, like literally reverse engineering bytecode and brute forcing it, or clicking somebody's like bundled JavaScript code in the front end, unbundling it, seeing how they set the types up and all this.


And I figured, probably if I have this problem, everybody's going to have this problem. And so quit Coinbase, started Helius, raised around and then a few months after FTX happened.


Anna Rose [06:53] Oh, whoa. So this is 2022. Now from that I can kind of date when you're playing with it. Is it like up -- like leading up to this? So 2022, you're building these block explorers and hanging out in there, and then, I guess, a few months after you create the company, boom.


Mert Mumtaz [07:10] Yep.


Anna Rose [07:11] Okay. I love that idea though, that you're like reverse engineering blockchains at that moment. It's super frustrating, I think, for like the average dev, but I bet it's a lot of fun too. Because by doing something like that, you're getting to know the logic underlying -- like you're kind of getting to know the logic that the client developers are thinking about, and that they're kind of putting into it, I guess.


Mert Mumtaz [07:32] Yeah. Yeah, it was -- I mean, it's fun to post about your findings, because nobody else has that information. So there's that inherent joy, let's say. But then once you actually do it, and then client dev just updates their contract or something, or their logic, which happens all the time, your code is just totally broken. And so you have to -- it's like a war. You have to keep updating your own parsers faster than they can update their own code, which obviously is a losing game for me. But Solana's gotten much better at that over the years.


Anna Rose [08:10] When did you actually first join? Like, when you were at Coinbase? What era is that?


Mert Mumtaz [08:15] Like $8. Solana, $8.


Anna Rose [08:19] What year is it?


Tarun Chitra [08:20] Everything is measured in price not time.


Anna Rose [08:20] I love that.


Tarun Chitra [08:23] Price is the real measurement of time.


Anna Rose [08:25] Wow.


Mert Mumtaz [08:28] Actually, yeah, that's a bad answer because Solana's made dollars twice now. Okay. So if people remember the Degen Apes Mint, before which Solana was at a very low price, like below $8. And then this mint happened, and then all of the NFT seasons started happening. That was around the time.


Anna Rose [08:47] Okay. 


Tarun Chitra [08:47] That's 2021 January or something?


Mert Mumtaz [08:51] No, no, it's 2021 Summer.


Tarun Chitra [08:53] Summer, okay.


Anna Rose [08:53] I see. I wonder, did you see Solana early, early on? Because I remember when it was first around 2020, 2019, I think I remember like NEAR and Solana and Mina. Like there was a group of teams that were all sort of more Silicon Valley. They were coming -- like just the engineers, the types of founders, kind of who the investors were, there was like this generation, and Solana was part of that. I wouldn't have been able to say back then, this is gonna be the one of that bunch that really comes out flying. Do you think there was something unique at that early stage, though, that set it on the path, or do you think there was sort of some fortuitous accidents that led it to get to where it got?


Mert Mumtaz [09:40] I wasn't there at least in an involved capacity during the very early days. So like before it was even called Solana. But, I mean, I guess I went through something similar when I was researching the different chains I want to build on. And so I looked at -- you know, Avalanche was pretty big at the time.


Anna Rose [09:57] Yeah. Oh, yeah. I would put that in that category too.


Mert Mumtaz [09:58] Even Polkadot was still around.


Mert Mumtaz [10:01] NEAR was kind of there, but they weren't as loud. So me and my co-founders at Helius, we just -- we all did the same program in university. It's called  APPLE MATH. It's a double in Applied math and communications and signals engineering. And so it's interesting because the way that Solana is structured is kind of like a giant radio. And so that just made the most sense. It just felt like the least amount of leaps that I had to make mentally to understand, and I just knew it would somewhat scale. I didn't know -- like there's been a bunch of new introductions since then.


But I figured like, okay, for Ethereum to scale, which I understood relatively well at that time, you need a bunch of conditionals in the future to evaluate to true. And they're obviously conditional on the other one. So like the merge had to happen, 4844 had to happen, danksharding has to happen, rollups had to be interoperable, all this stuff. And while I think that will happen, the simpler and easier bet for me at the time was like, well, Solana scales, it's broken in many ways due to how the code is written, but that's a very generic problem. You need to make the code more efficient and introduce some other things that we can talk about later. But it just seemed like a less risky bet and a more interesting scaling path.


Anna Rose [11:23] Let's talk about the crash time. So you just started Helius a few months before that, then the price drops. Did you ever have a moment where you were like, okay, I guess that's it?


Mert Mumtaz [11:34] No, no, I was -- it was the total opposite for me. And that's why I was so confused all the time on Twitter, because, I was sort of reply guy pretty aggressively by this point, but --


Tarun Chitra [11:44] Yeah. I was going to say we probably should talk about the history of how you became the reply guy of that era.


Anna Rose [11:53] Sure.


Mert Mumtaz [11:54] Sure. Yeah. So I was studying Solana on my own time, but I also understood how the ETH kind of EVM chains worked at a high level. And I was doing work with my own hands on both of them at Coinbase, but also on my own time. But then I would always see -- I don't know when I started seeing this, but actually I used to reply guy Solana guys first. Because they would try to say dumb shit around the NFT supplies like I mentioned. And I would be like, no, that's incorrect.


And so I would -- it started me as me reply guying influencers on Solana. And then at some point I noticed some people that weren't even really on Ethereum, but they were just weird fund manager types. I think Justin Bons is one that came up quite frequently back in that time, and he would say something like, Solana has a fraudulent design because the leader's schedule ahead of time, and so it's not random.


And I'd be like, that is actually how a very large number of blockchains work. This is not specific to Solana. ETH 2.0 even is like pseudo random. It's not even purely random. I'm not even aware of anything that's purely random other than Algorand, which has the name "rand" in it. And so anyways, I would just find all these posts and then and reply guy them pretty aggressively, and then people just start tagging me in them before I was even aware of them. And so at that point, once I see it, I'm like, oh shit, and I had to reply. I know better these days. But back in that time I didn't. 


And then one particular criticism was always around FTX and Alameda and these predatory tokenomics and whatnot at the time. Which brings me to this, which is when I heard that FTX was going under, I was like oh sweet. Now the predators are out, now we can actually get to work, and we don't have this big piece of FUD. But I think my time horizon for thinking that was just too different to everybody else. Because everybody else just figured no, no, you're dead. Like that was the only reason you're alive, which I didn't agree with. And people also weren't too close to the metal of what FTX was doing back then.


The last thing they released on Solana was an NFT marketplace that totally tanked, and was just a total failure. And they were also investing in the Move chains like Sui and Aptos. They invested in Polygon and a whole bunch of other chains, and so, it didn't seem like they were actually that useful for a very long time, at least by the time I joined in mid-2021.


And so I was happy. We also obviously run a company, and our numbers were not affected at all. We were still getting a steady stream of developers using the product and good growth week over week, month over month. And so I was just very confused. And at that point the amount of FUD on Twitter got to such a level where it became basically my second job to just reply to people and be like, this is incorrect, you are extremely incorrect, or some combination of those along with --


Tarun Chitra [14:55] Second job or first job? Arguably there were times it could have been the first job.


Mert Mumtaz [15:02] And people ask me this all the time, like what do you -- what is the split Between Twitter and being the CEO? And it's like, I see it as kind of the same thing. Like I don't consciously schedule, like, okay, I'm going to do calls, or I'm going to do podcasts or flights and conferences. It just all goes along with the same job. Because if the ecosystem is dead because nobody's actually refuting these points, then you're not gonna have a company to begin with in that ecosystem.


Anna Rose [15:28] At that time, everyone -- I mean, so the FUD was crazy. The price dropped. What I remember is that all the prices dropped. Everyone, everything was affected. But Solana dropped a lot. It was kind of -- I mean, I think at the time, did it get down to 8, actually, in that little block? Down from something like 200 almost, or 150 --


Mert Mumtaz [15:48] Like 260.


Anna Rose [15:49] Yeah. Wild.


Mert Mumtaz [15:50] Yeah.


Anna Rose [15:51] I'm guessing there was sort of the die hard crew that stayed, that continued building. You were talking about, like you still had the same number of customers. Who were those people at that time? Like how would you describe that group?


Mert Mumtaz [16:03] Backpack is one. So with Armani and Tristan at the time, they had just released a new crypto wallet, Backpack. And then this NFT projects Mad Lads, for example. That was one. I mean, Jupiter was still around. All the DEXs like -- well, not all of them, but Orca, Raydium were around. Kamino was around, Jito was around. I mean, actually, not many people left. I think some people tried or experimented because I think Aptos launched kind of right after this. But that didn't work for them. And so they came back from Aptos.


There was also a lot of drama with NFTs and them getting grants to go to Polygon. And at the time, I had looked into this for a little bit, and I was like, wait a minute. These guys are just getting paid to go on this. And so I called that out, and that got me into a whole lot of trouble for a very long time. And then I became actually very good friends with the Polygon guys. But so, there was a lot of those shenanigans going on. But really, with the exception of DeGods, which was just an NFT project, nobody really left. They all kind of just had worse revenues and activity, but I didn't see many people leave.


Anna Rose [17:16] The main builders stayed. Tarun, did you work on Solana stuff at that time?


Tarun Chitra [17:22] Mainly, the main thing I had done at that point was kind of I invested in Jito in 2022. And so I'd spent a lot of time just reading the scheduler code, and on trying to understand the MEV stuff. Because one thing -- I think the thing that convinced me there was something I misassessed Solana over time was trying to really understand the scheduler and the MEV usage and how kind of like they -- it has a very different mechanism for priority auctions and priority fees.


And it was sort of a sign that people were really using the chain enough that you had to come up with some of these things. Whereas, you look at Cosmos chains, you look at Polkadot or things like that, you could tell there was no real usage because no one had to build any of these priority scheduling things. There was not really this type of, hey, we have to optimize our MEV auction for our chain because we just didn't have any users to do that.


Anna Rose [18:20] There were a couple MEV projects I know on Cosmos, but they never really took off. There wasn't enough MEV.


Tarun Chitra [18:25] Or they pivoted.


Anna Rose [18:27] Okay.


Tarun Chitra [18:27] Or they pivoted.


Anna Rose [18:27] Yeah true.


Tarun Chitra [18:27] Yeah, exactly, exactly. But my point is there's sort of -- I'm trying to remember the name of this kind of apocryphal law. It's basically a thing that says like the structure of your codebase reflects the structure of your organization. Like if your code base is very hierarchical, it means that you have a very hierarchical organization. If your code is very random, it's like, oh, you've just had people come and go quickly.


And there's a sense in which, like when you look at how people think about the transaction supply chain from end users all the way to the chain, that tells you something about how much people actually are using the chain more than the actual code itself. If they've had to modify these types of things, it's because they've had kind of crazy demand and usage.


So I think at that time, I was just trying to understand this MEV related stuff because, yeah, the auction model in Solana is very different. There's not this one big auction like there is in Ethereum. There's kind of many small ones that get aggregated. And I think in general the kind of high throughput nature of Solana just makes it look very different.


Yeah. I think it's good to have had to have both kind of the horizontal scaling versus vertical scaling blockchains because in some sense, I think, there's probably not going to be a winner takes all that wins in one of those. But that -- maybe Mert will disagree with me on that, but --


Mert Mumtaz [19:50] No, no. That sounds right. One of the big misconceptions that I saw quite a bit on Twitter was like a lot of hate towards Solana because Solana claims that it can do all the traffic on the universe or something around crypto. But that's actually not the case and that's not the goal. The goal is just we think it's cool to have a giant state machine that can sync information as fast as possible around the world. That's it. Now that'll benefit some use cases, and it will be totally senseless for other use cases. So it's really about what are the business requirements here? Why do you actually need a chain?


Anna Rose [20:25] And actually just bringing -- actually we're sort of -- we're still in late 2022, early 2023, but like it's evolved a lot since then. Has the tech changed? Do you feel like you're dealing with a different beast under the hood now? I mean obviously tons of tooling, I think you've built some of it. So yeah. Tell us a little bit about that evolution.


Mert Mumtaz [20:45] Yeah. Well, people probably remember all the outages in 2022.


Anna Rose [20:49] Oh yeah.


Mert Mumtaz [20:50] And there wasn't many in 2023. It's actually due to what Tarun was saying. There was a lot of demand. So there would be an NFT mint and people -- and I mean these people were insane. They would get data center grade equipment and just spam the living shit out of the nodes. Like 10, 100 gigabytes per second bandwidth times few multiples of that constantly.


And so the amount of traffic that these nodes were handling was pretty insane. And so we knew that that wasn't going to work. Toly and team basically did not expect how degenerate people would be when it came to actually using blockchains. They thought these must be somewhat reasonable and they'll just do order book stuff. But then he's like, why are people just aping this much into JPEGs?


And so there was that kind of whole series of outages. And there was a few big changes that came from that that most people just, I guess, weren't aware of. But one was the introduction of changing the networking protocol, like going from just raw UDP to QUIC and like Google's thing, adding stake-weighted QoS, quality of service based on stake bandwidth, or getting bandwidth in proportion to stake, localized fee markets, right?


People don't actually know this, but Solana has said they have fee markets, but they haven't actually had fee markets in production until like maybe not even last year. So they're actually quite new. And a bunch of other changes like that. Some of them quite boring, but very much dynamic.


So for example, just this past upgrade 2.1, which is the latest client upgrade, they made a few changes to the client such that because we say the block times are 400 milliseconds, but in practice they can be like 450, 500 milliseconds even. And now they upgraded the -- or fixed so many bugs in the core client that now the average block time is like 390 milliseconds. So it actually went down.


And that just goes to show you how much it contrasts to Ethereum where they did not plan that to happen. They just wrote the code, fixed it and then the block time just went down. Which sounds good, maybe not so good, who knows. But there's a lot of upgrades like that. And then going forward, there's a much more structured process because now there's a second client with Firedancer and a much more structured roadmap versus the early days, you can maybe think of it as like a startup just not trying to die.


Anna Rose [23:28] Yeah.


Tarun Chitra [23:29] So actually, kind of question that has come up in and caused fights in Ethereum, but I've actually been kind of curious about how it is kind of viewed in Solana is, the multi client roadmap in Ethereum has been controversial for a bunch of reasons. One, you have five clients. If you have a bug in one, then how do you replicate the bug in the others, right? Like they're very different codebases, different languages. You might not be able to perfectly replicate or be bitwise compatible. And we've seen a couple bugs live in Ethereum where that has been true.


Anna Rose [24:02] But isn't it supposed to be that if there's a bug in one, it's saved by the fact that there is no bug in the other? That's always the story they tell.


Tarun Chitra [24:10] That's one side of the argument. But the developer side of the argument is I have to maintain multiple clients, right?


Anna Rose [24:15] Yeah. So would you try to introduce the bug if it's not a breaking bug, just to keep it going?


Tarun Chitra [24:21] Well, I'm more just saying like, hey, maintaining five copies of something that's supposed to be equal to one has a cost, and the development cost of like I add a new feature to a fork, and now all the clients have to agree there's some overhead, right?


So for instance, in the Firedancer and on the Agave type of thing, if I make a fork, I need to make sure the forks agree beforehand. And sure, I could go run them live and run into the edge case. But that's not an ideal scenario for a -- so given that you are running infrastructure provider, you're running RPCs and making sure people can submit, how do you feel about this kind of multi client thing? Like two is not ten, but where do you -- what are your thoughts on the multi client for a single client tradeoff?


Mert Mumtaz [25:09] Yeah. I mean just from a purely selfish point of view, we don't like it because it's a lot of extra work for us. And it even happens today like with the order flow games because the protocol isn't necessarily defined very well at the boundaries. And so there's like six different ways to send transactions today where the RPC somehow has to figure this out now.


The reason why Firedancer was extremely important, especially at the time when it was announced, is because of the reasons I said, which is the software kind of just sucks on the core client. It's just an unsalvageable codebase, it's totally broken in many ways and the protocol has no spec. Like a lot of missing basic things that are extremely difficult to do a refactor of, but are probably doable when you do a rewrite in something as a fresh rewrite.


And so that's why Firedancer was exciting because now with a pure rewrite and now good interface boundaries and specs and all this, that's definitely a net better situation than the existing stuff. But I'm not sure what happened here. But Anza hired a lot of very smart people to the point where those guys actually, it seems like they've actually been able to salvage the codebase, and it seems like they probably will be able to make it much better going forward.


And so now you have this case where you have two clients who are probably pretty equal, I would say, especially because Firedancer hasn't been live yet. And so I'm going to give the points to Anza in that case. And so now you have a much different scenario than Ethereum where Ethereum is a bit more like equality of outcome in a sense. I'm not going to get political, but it has to be that way for the system to work.


Whereas on Solana it's like they're kind of just competing against each other as hard as they can, and whoever gets the most validators to adopt it is kind of the winner. And that also depends on how well are they serving their customers, who are the validators, right? Like are you maximizing the revenue? Are you actually making transaction inclusion much better, less fragmented, all these different things?


And so, I don't know how it plays out. We certainly don't like -- or I don't know many people on Solana who actually like the concept of multiple clients past maybe 2. And the only reason 2 is useful is because like a day 0 or something in one of the clients and then now you're totally fucked and you have to use a different client or something. But as an RPC provider, not a fan. And I'll let them battle it out.


Tarun Chitra [27:36] Yeah. I mean I only ask this because in Ethereum, I actually think the interesting thing is that the production clients and the testing clients are completely different. A lot of people like developing with reth, but they don't -- they use -- no one who's running execution nodes is using it. And so, I feel like there's sort of this problem of like too many clients equals too much maintenance. Obviously, yeah. From your perspective, I totally get it. More than two sounds like a nightmare. Right? But yeah, just there's sort of this weird thing. I've never really understood why you need so many clients. I'm more of the mindset that you're more likely to have developers introduce bugs by accident when they have to rewrite the same thing five times in five different places than otherwise, but --


Anna Rose [28:17] Interesting. I actually hadn't thought of that. What you just shared Mert, that observation of the multi client and roughly evenly used multi client. Like that's kind of -- that's seemingly a bit of the goal. You don't want one to win in Ethereum, and you're kind of saying, actually, in Solana would be fine if one won.


Mert Mumtaz [28:36] Yeah. I mean like -- and there's some architectural decisions or protocol decisions that affect this. I think Ethereum has the concept of an inactivity leak, for example, that might play nicely with multiple clients. Whereas on Solana, I mean, we don't like outages, nobody does, they're unacceptable. But if there is one, how much do we care about safety over liveness, and what's that trade off look like?


And obviously everybody has different opinions on this, but if there's one client live, and then you're doing it such that you have a backup running with the other validator? So like Helius, we're the biggest validator. Assume you run Anza, and then we have in the background in like a blue green deployment, Firedancer running. Then let's say the chain goes down from the Anza bug. We can switch over. Now it might not be instant, it might take 30 minutes or something, but that still just did the job.


Anna Rose [29:28] I thought I heard -- and this is because I'm not that deep in this ecosystem, but didn't -- when like the Trump Token launch, wasn't there some sort of outage or problem or something didn't quite happen. Like maybe it was only on the wallet level, but can you share a little bit of what happened there?


Mert Mumtaz [29:43] Sure. So, interestingly, the Trump Coin itself was handled very well by everybody. The problem was, within two days, Melania launched a coin. And when Melania launched a coin, the following happened.


This is kind of hard to follow, but roughly speaking, there's two paths for transactions on Solana. One is the regular Solana client. One is Jito, right? So Jito and Solana, let's say. Jito is more used for, obviously MEV folks, but like arbitrage traders and all this. And what happened was Jito became degraded. And when Jito becomes degraded, those arbitrage folks now can't use Jito, and now they must use the actual main scheduler of the chain, which means now there's much more competition and congestion on the main chain, which means, among other things, the fees go up.


But also since the scheduler itself is so inefficient, it inherently makes the chain less performant, like you process less transactions. But also some very bespoke things here, like Jupiter, for example, hard caps their fees on the frontend, such that as a user -- assume now the fees on Solana have risen from $0.001 to $1, Jupiter will not set the fees to a dollar. They just won't do it. There's a hard cap for safety purposes. But if you do that, then your users are literally locking themselves out because they're not paying the fees. They can't.


And that actually tends to be the case with all apps on Solana, including Phantom. And so, you have this situation where everybody is bidding below market for getting included, except the arbitrage traders who are bots.


Anna Rose [31:25] Are they blocking them out? Are they taking that away from the chance that the users can't actually get anything through? Was that what had actually happened, that people were just trying to get a transaction and it just wasn't happening?


Mert Mumtaz [31:37] Yes. But the reason is -- yeah. I mean, one is obviously Jito went down, which caused the fees to be higher and caused more contention on the main validators. But the second, and I confirmed this myself, is the apps themselves, not intentionally, of course, but accidentally lock the users out from competing because if it costs $5 to be included, but you don't let your users pay over 5 cents, no user is going to get in.


And so what I did was I went on Jupiter, change my own fees, and then bid above the market, and I would always get included myself. But you're not going to tell all thousands of users, hey, you have to set the fees manually now. That's just not going to work.


Anna Rose [32:18] Especially not all the new users that had just joined for the first time.


Mert Mumtaz [32:22] Yeah, yeah. So that's what happens. But there was no halt of block production or anything. You could, I think, probably make an interesting argument like, hey, does Jito being degraded mean Solana is down, because it is a Jito client? But I don't think that would compute if you took it to its eventuality.


Anna Rose [32:43] Is there actually like a postmortem on Jito though? Like is there going to be a community effort to fix that, or does it seem like such an unusual spike, and they don't expect it anytime soon, so it's okay to leave it as is?


Mert Mumtaz [32:55] No, no. I mean, those guys ship. I mean, they haven't disclosed everything, but they have many upgrades coming.


Anna Rose [33:00] Got it. All right. I want to dive in now to some ZK stuff. I feel like talking through the history of your involvement in Solana, but also just Solana's development. This has been really helpful also to share a little bit of the distinction between Solana and some of the ecosystems that we're used to exploring ZK in. Let's do this survey that I wanted to do, which is like, what is out there in ZK? And maybe let's start with what was first? Where did you first see ZK being used? At what level? Is it in the kind of rollup? I know it's not a rollup in Solana, but is it rollup-like? Is it for compression, let's say, or is it for something else, like privacy?


Mert Mumtaz [33:39] Yeah. I think the first, and I could be wrong, I'm sure there's some other thing that I haven't heard of, but if I'm to just maybe put on my mainstream hat, probably the first two were Elusiv and Light Protocol, and those were both doing privacy at the time.


Anna Rose [33:57] Okay.


Mert Mumtaz [33:57] So private payments, private DEXs, things of this nature. And there was even an NFT project that was relatively popular at that time. I think it was called Dark protocol or something along those lines. And they had some small ecosystem of tools like ZK confidential transfers and stuff like this. And so those were kind of the big ones.


And then they basically all pivoted because I don't think they found product market fit with privacy. And so Elusiv rebranded to something called Arcium. And now they do what's called verifiable compute, where it's kind of a different network, but it still uses Solana for some elements. And then Light, they pivoted to basically ZK scaling. But this looks very different than other chains because Solana scaling, these are very different.


So to give you a rough idea, on EVM chains, generally speaking, not always, compute is relatively expensive, but storage is cheap. And on Solana, it's the total opposite, where compute is extremely cheap, but storage is very expensive. And so, for example, if I send you right now an NFT or USDC, what I need to do is I need to pay to open your storage account for that asset. So not only do I pay a transaction fee for doing compute, I also have to pay a fee to open up your storage.


And you can imagine that, let's say you're doing an airdrop. I now have to do this to 10,000 different accounts. And so that's 10,000 storage fees, and then 10,000 compute fees. And so we had this thing called NFT compression. This is before Light, where basically what we would do is we would not store the data in these storage accounts. So the data would not be stored in accounts. It would be stored as, let's say, call data on transactions.


So instead of opening 10,000 different accounts and airdropping to 10,000 different people, what you would do is you would do 10,000 different transactions. And then the details of that transaction were in the form of Merkle leaves. And so then what you would need is an infrastructure provider like Helius to replay that state and then expose the latest state to people.


Anna Rose [36:23] Okay. I like the distinction you're making though, that compute being cheap on Solana and expensive on Ethereum. I mean, I'm obviously way more used to the Ethereum model, but I don't know if I would have known that, that you'd consider compute more expensive on Ethereum and storage being cheap. I mean, I feel like what you've described here, it suggests that like rollups, how ZK rollups are working, are they making use of that cheap storage on sort of the L1? And so, if you try to replicate that, you'd have to kind of think about it differently, if you're doing it on Solana?


Mert Mumtaz [36:58] Well, so if I'm to maybe extend the thought from before with the compression stuff, so now what happened is the compression stuff that I just mentioned, and this didn't include ZK, only worked for NFTs. It was specific to NFT accounts, right? Because on Ethereum, your data and your logic is in the same contract, it's in the same place. On Solana, that's not the case. You have explicitly separated out accounts for data and logic. So it's decoupled in that way.


And so then the question is like, okay, if this works for NFTs, can it not work for all types of accounts on Solana? So generalizing compression to the entire chain such that we scale storage for the chain, right? We're not scaling compute, we're not bottlenecked by TPS, we're bottlenecked by rent, which is the fee that you pay to open an account. And so with ZK compression, it is any account on Solana, you can compress it and then link it back with a Merkle hash or a Merkle root. And so you can guarantee the integrity of that data on the ledger. But so this is kind of funny --


Anna Rose [38:12] So it's not a rollup then? Because for some reason I thought it was like a Solana equivalent to a rollup. Different, but similar in that it's like batching a lot of different state. But here you're saying it's a single account being compressed.


Mert Mumtaz [38:28] Or many accounts. But yeah, it is not a rollup. And this is where it gets really interesting or funny. At the time we're like, okay, what should we call this? And ZK is not used in many places here. ZK is used only for the proof and making it constant size. Like you can actually get away without using ZK. So it's kind of like a nice to have, but it's not strictly necessary. But we call the ZK compression because we use compression and then we use ZK on top of the compression.


So we released this product. By the way, Helius did not build this. We only built the indexers. Light Protocol built the actual protocol.


Anna Rose [39:05] Okay.


Mert Mumtaz [39:06] But, so I tweeted it and my goodness, everybody on Ethereum was like, oh my God, they're just calling it --


Anna Rose [39:13] Rollup.


Mert Mumtaz [39:14] It's a rollup, it's a validium, it's an optimism, it's all the stuff. And we're like, no, it's not any of those. And nobody would believe me. And so what I had to do was, I was on Farcaster, I was like, I need to get a hold of Vitalik somehow. And so, I described how it works to Vitalik. Because by the way, we always call this, the technical term for this is a stateless accumulator. This is not a new concept. This already exists in computer science. It's a stateless accumulator.


But on Ethereum, people kind of conflated with the rollup. And so I'm like, Vitalik, what would you call this? And he said, yeah, this does not seem like a rollup. It seems much more like Ethereum's verkle tries and stateless client architecture stuff. I was like, yes. Thank you. So there's a lot of confusion there. But it's not a rollup in the traditional sense of what you would call a rollup.


Anna Rose [40:02] Got it.


Tarun Chitra [40:03] Yeah. I mean, I think the controversy here was kind of funny because I feel like there are other things that people call network extensions in Solana that are much closer to rollups than this and -- or are just basically rollups. I don't exactly get why everyone wants to fight about the nomenclature though, because it's like, don't you care about what it's used for rather than what word I call it? And somehow I feel like this entire discussion made me feel like -- remind myself of that because it's like, is the name that important? I think, isn't it what it's used for more important? But that was just sort of my feeling when I was reading this, and I muted the word rollup for a few weeks.


Anna Rose [40:48] But you are saying there is something -- there are kind of equivalent to rollups already in a different form, but maybe not using ZK.


Mert Mumtaz [40:55] Yep. Yeah, there are rollups on Solana. I don't think any of them are live. There is -- so maybe going along with the survey from the past question. So Succinct is now on Solana. RISC Zero is on Solana. They have, you know, Boundless and they're doing some other work. There's Bonsol, which is by Anagram, that's another ZK framework. And then within -- Solana actually has no live rollups today. But one team that's working on it is Zeta Markets. Their new product is called Bullet, and it's a sovereign rollup using Sovereign Labs framework. So that'll be like the first sovereign rollup on Solana.


So the term network extensions, by the way, horrible name, makes no sense, and I tried telling this to the folks who came up with it long before it came out. And the reason is simple. A name is supposed to be specific such that the reader understands what's being referred to. But in this case it's more used as a marketing term to mean we can come up with our own names as well. And so the easiest way to think about it is a network extension can include L2s, but it doesn't have to. It can be many other different things. It can be, for example, ZK compression, which is not a rollup, but it's a network extension.


Anna Rose [42:12] Okay. That is also -- I see, so it's like the meta category then.


Mert Mumtaz [42:15] Yes.


Anna Rose [42:16] But doesn't the whole idea of network extensions kind of go against what Solana built itself as in the first place? Like going back to that story of how Ethereum -- you know, the full extent of Ethereum is the merge, the EIPs, the rollups, the talk to each other. And having those extensions off the L1 is built because of the way the L1 works. But Solana, I feel like was always billed as like, you don't need rollups because it's so performant as an L1. So why have rollups? What's the point there? Or sorry, network extensions or any of these things?


Mert Mumtaz [42:49] Yeah. So the difference here and Toly would make this distinction all the time, is that, what we care about is having the execution on-chain, right? With a traditional rollup on EVM, for example, there's not enough compute that you can do on the L1, so you must do the execution off-chain. And off-chain means a rollup, and then you roll it back up to the L1, right? So execution is not the L1. But we think that execution is the most interesting part of Solana or let's say blockchains.


And so as long as execution remains on the L1, which in the case of ZK compression, for example, all the transactions are still on the L1, so the execution is still there, but the latest state exposed might not be on the L1. But that doesn't matter because Solana's thesis is like, the value is in execution, right? MEV, priority fees, auctions, all this requires execution, and that's what we want on the L1.


Now that being said, there's another slippery line of thinking that I've seen recently, which is like, okay, well Solana is getting some network extensions. Does that mean it's becoming like Ethereum? And I would actually say, it's becoming more like Bitcoin, where the core difference here is that the L1 does not adjust itself to cater to rollups, right? Like on Bitcoin you can build a rollup and Bitcoin people don't care. You can fork and put a dog coin on it or something, Bitcoin people don't care. They just have that one thing they want to do.


Solana is the same, which is they just want to reduce latency, increase bandwidth, meaning cheap execution on-chain. Now if somebody wants to come and say, hey, I'm going to actually also build a rollup on top of this, they can do that because it's a permissionless network. But you're not going to get the core devs to be like, okay, let me now give you some extra blob space or something. That's kind of the core difference.


Anna Rose [44:44] What about then zkVMs though? Because in the case of zkVMs, at least again, the way I've understood it, a lot of it is about like you're submitting proofs, but a lot of the execution is actually happening wherever, but often not on the L1. Is that different when you look at Succinct or RISC Zero connecting to the Solana ecosystem or are they still using Solana in the same way?


Mert Mumtaz [45:08] Again, it's a permissionless network. And so if people think there's some weird market gap where people need much more compute than Solana, and they think they don't want to do it on Solana and they want to do it on rollup, then yeah, I mean it's a free market. You can build this product, see if you get traction, all this.


The core difference is again, the core devs are not going to care, they're just going to -- they're not going to write new opcodes or something just so that you accompany rollups. Like for example, the big difference between Ethereum is that if you look at the roadmap, it's designed to become a hub for rollups, right? Solana would not do that. They just care about the one thing, which is IBRL.


And now if the block space is valuable enough such that you want to extend it and build a rollup on top of it, by all means go ahead. And for some cases it might be better for that. Like a based rollup with much shorter block times, that might be better. But the core thing is that Jito, Helius, Firedancer, Anza, we're not going to build rollups. The core devs just won't do that.


Anna Rose [46:12] I don't know if you followed any of the ZK development in Ethereum, but there was also the coprocessor idea. This idea of doing -- or sometimes it'll be like an AI environment that lives off-chain and then uses ZK to come back. But does that actually matter in something like Solana? Because like, yes, it's amazingly performant, but I'm guessing it's still blockchain performant. Is it able to do really big things, really big computation loads? Is it able to do something that would be -- yeah. You'd have to have in the real world like tons of machines running it. Like can it do it?


Mert Mumtaz [46:46] No. I mean, obviously it would depend on what we're referring to, but I would say performant in the context of blockchains, not performant in the context of compute in general. It always comes back -- so with Solana, it's very simple because there's really just one vision which is decentralized Nasdaq. Can you sync prices across the world with minimal latency, right? That's it. Now if you want to do other things on top of this, then you can . So with RISC Zero, you can do this. Actually, Solana has the concept of ephemeral rollups where state is extended ephemerally, and then brought back right after the -- yeah. And so there's funky things like this.


Anna Rose [47:24] Cool.


Mert Mumtaz [47:25] And I'm being a little repetitive, but the whole dichotomy is that people can do those things. In Solana, you can't -- I'm not going to be able to ban anybody, hey, like, you're breaking the law here. The only thing is we're not going to change core.


Anna Rose [47:39] Yeah.


Mert Mumtaz [47:40] To accompany it.


Anna Rose [47:41] Are you sure it'll never change? How come you're so sure?


Mert Mumtaz [47:47] No, no. For sure, it could change in the future. Like it wouldn't -- because otherwise it's just an ideology and that's not engineering. And so engineering is just about, okay, what problems are we solving that actually exist, and that we actually can solve better than others? So I don't foresee it changing in at least the next five, six, seven, eight years maybe because you can also see the current roadmap, which involves async execution, multiple concurrent leaders, and other things along those lines.


That being said, let's say some breakthrough happens that we don't see coming and within two years, now you must have ZK on-chain encore to an enshrined concept or something. Then, we're still pragmatic. We won't just say no, no, no. Like the gods told us not to do this, so we won't do it. It just depends on --


Anna Rose [48:36] You're not Bitcoin core.


Mert Mumtaz [48:38] Yeah.


Tarun Chitra [48:38] Well, another thing I will say is like, I actually think the coprocessor type of stuff makes more sense in some ways. And so I think that's why the ZK you see, at least from people taking the existing VMs and applying it to Solana look more like coprocessors than it is like a rollup, in the sense that under really high latency constraints, if you want to do some sort of long running calculation infrequently, you kind of don't really want to constantly be broadcasting that to a chain, and dealing with kind of getting the transaction in. But you do maybe want to do that infrequently.


And in theory these Solana validators are already running beefy hardware. So maybe they do something like restaking or something where they are participating in these off-chain coprocessing networks alongside their validator, and only infrequently have to post.


So I think in Ethereum, the coprocessor stuff never took off because there just wasn't enough demand for it. And people once they went to rollup --


Anna Rose [49:42] They can do it there.


Tarun Chitra [49:43] They just kind of were like, okay, well compute is so cheap, I don't care anymore. It was sort of a very weird thing. So I think that's why we also saw, you know, in the market every single coprocessor just pivoted to becoming a VM.


Anna Rose [49:56] Totally.


Tarun Chitra [49:56] Which is also just weird -- the idea of like I had a product, and I'm going to become less of a product, I'm going to become a virtual machine, is a very funny thing to observe about a market, right? Because it started narrower and it got broader. Usually in startups it's like I start broader and I get narrower.


Anna Rose [50:13] Well, they moved to a different part of the stack almost. They were like, oh, okay, we haven't quite nailed it, but actually Lagrange moved a different way. They went prover network from coprocessor, I think. That seems to be the two directions.


Mert Mumtaz [50:25] I forgot one thing about ZK on Solana, which is that because I was talking about how core devs won't accompany it, that's not technically correct in the full sense because Solana has these new things called token extensions. It's pluggable programs into Solana, and one of them is a confidential transfer. So within Solana core you can actually do confidential transfers and those confidential transfers use ZK. So it's built into the core protocol that you can confidentially transact.


Anna Rose [50:58] I was also reading about something -- maybe this is what you're talking about, but it was called like syscalls, and that there were some like ZK-related ones. Is that what you're describing or is that something else?


Mert Mumtaz [51:09] It's related. Yeah. That goes like pretty in the weeds. But that's not like in the context of scaling, it's to enable other things like confidential transfers.


Anna Rose [51:19] But this is inside the protocol itself. So this is where we're like, I'm guessing.


Mert Mumtaz [51:22] Yeah


Anna Rose [51:23] That's cool. Can you explain what those are, for our audience? I think they'll probably follow.


Mert Mumtaz [51:29] Assuming the audience is like EVM focused, a good way to explain it would be on EVM, you generally need to deploy a new contract for a new token, and then you need to write different things for that token, and then it needs to follow the ERC-20 interface.


On Solana, this is not the case. On Solana, you have enshrined programs. So like the token program. And then you just say token program, create new token, here's the ticker. So that's very simple, very different. And so one of those new features is that token program, create new token, and then transfer confidentially. So now every token with a token extension on Solana can be transferred confidentially. So you can see who received it and who sent it, but you can't see the amount.


Anna Rose [52:14] That's so cool. That's like partial privacy all of a sudden, but built into when you're --  this is like, is it a choice when you're actually developing the token? Like will it be individual tokens have that quality or is it certain accounts will have that quality?


Mert Mumtaz [52:27] Yeah, yeah. You can add this to any individual token.


Anna Rose [52:31] Oh, cool. Wow. Yeah. I haven't heard of something like that. And that's ZK.


Mert Mumtaz [52:35] Yep.


Anna Rose [52:35] Nice. I feel like we've done kind of an interesting survey of where ZK is being used in this stack. Some of it is applications on top, some of it is actually within the client itself. But we started this talking a little bit more about the MEV in Solana, and the fact that that was really active compared to other ecosystems. I know that in MEV land, Tarun, you're often telling me like TEEs are used for MEV stuff. There's a reason to use other kinds of either privacy preserving or advanced cryptography.


Do you know, Mert, if there's also stuff like that happening in the Solana world where trusted execution environments are used in order to, I don't know, hide something to make sure that there's this place where execution can happen without anyone seeing it on-chain.


Mert Mumtaz [53:23] I cannot comment on this.


Anna Rose [53:25] Really?


Mert Mumtaz [53:25] I think perhaps in the future.


Anna Rose [53:28] Okay. Is it because maybe there's something, but you don't have to say. Sounds like something might be in the works.


Mert Mumtaz [53:35] Once it's released, I'll flag it to you so you can have those people on.


Tarun Chitra [53:38] Yeah. I will -- I'm in the same boat as Mert, actually.


Anna Rose [53:41] Oh, like sworn to secrecy. That's amazing.


Tarun Chitra [53:45] Let's just say people are in Solana are looking at everything. It's not like they're like, hey, we hate cryptography or something.


Anna Rose [53:54] Can I -- I mean, there are these other sort of advanced programmable crypto stuff like MPC and FHE, both like FHE especially is still very fresh. So I don't know. Do you -- have you heard of anything like that being used in the Solana ecosystem? MPC, FHE, I mean even I think you did mention one thing, the --


Tarun Chitra [54:15] The hosted MPC wallets, the turnkeys of the world, are certainly used in Solana, right? Like if I look at Moonshot, Moonshot's basically enabled by MPC, like login. So I think -- but that's not something that's unique to Solana.That's like all networks kind of have that.


Mert Mumtaz [54:34] There's a few MCP -- teams who use MCP --


Anna Rose [54:36] MPC.


Mert Mumtaz [54:37] MPC.


Tarun Chitra [54:38] No, no, no. But the reason he's saying MCP is that's Multiple Concurrent Proposer, which is like something that's getting implemented in Solana.


Mert Mumtaz [54:46] Yeah. It's actually embarrassing because I worked on MPC at Coinbase, one of Coinbase Wallet products. But yeah, on Solana there's a few teams, there's like Squads, Turnkey, different wallet abstraction folks. Backpack is adding it for their exchange products, which is on SVM. Cube, I think, actually is also like a hybrid L1 DEX CEX that uses MPC pretty strongly as well. So a lot of usage for MPC specifically. For FHE, I'm not sure. I think Kyle is pretty interested in that, like Multicoin, but I'm not sure if I've seen anything.


Anna Rose [55:25] I'm actually going to link to a blog post from Helius which is focused on ZK applications. In there, you did mention that Arcium, which was previously Elusiv, was using something called multiparty computation execution environments, which sounds like a combination of MPC-TEE, but maybe ZK too. But yeah. Do you think -- is that related, actually, do you know?


Mert Mumtaz [55:45] I think they basically rebranded that to verifiable compute. So I don't know exactly what they're going to do, like their go to market isn't -- I haven't kept up with it, but that would be a team that strongly uses ZK and other cryptography on Solana.


Tarun Chitra [56:03] I have a more practical question which is we've talked about a lot of these applications, but I'm kind of curious, what is the developer -- since you see developers who are building kind of, you know, using you to submit transactions and test and stuff like that, like what are the kind of features of the vein that use advanced cryptography that you see demand for? Are there a lot of people trying to do private tokens, private transactions, or is it more focused on compression and saving gas, and doing kind of these token launches becoming cheaper? What is sort of the demand on the developer side look like?


Anna Rose [56:38] And that's today because you did say that earlier there had been no product market fit for privacy. But yeah, curious if that's changed.


Mert Mumtaz [56:45] Yeah. I would say there's probably still no real PMF for privacy on Solana at least. Although I invest in privacy stuff pretty frequently. The majority is based around compression which is just scaling large scale bulk token operations or account operations. And then yeah, we've worked with obviously Light and yeah, like there's syscalls in the protocol itself. So the developer experience is not too bad. Just directly working with core.


And then Sovereign Labs, that's been an interesting one. Although I'm not sure if they use ZK for their stuff or if it's just for posting DA. I'll have to double check that. And then, there's some interest around the scaling stuff that I've seen, but generally, we don't work too closely with those folks because like -- or at least, I should say that wouldn't technically be Solana. This might be for their own L2 or something, which is an SVM rollup. But that doesn't sell on Solana. But I haven't seen many selling on Solana.


Anna Rose [57:44] Cool. Well, thanks for that survey. That was actually really helpful. ZK in Solana does seem a little bit at an earlier stage. It sounds like there's little inroads, but you just kind of mentioned maybe it's not being used that much yet. I don't know if the utility is completely found within the ecosystem yet.


Mert Mumtaz [58:03] Yeah. I would just say that the teams who actually work on those like Light would probably put me to shame on that. Like they focus quite a bit on it.


Anna Rose [58:12] All right.


Mert Mumtaz [58:13] But from -- you know, our customers are regular app developers mostly, or quants and traders and stuff, so it is entirely possible that we just don't come across those types of users. And so Light would have a better idea.


Anna Rose [58:25] Okay.


Mert Mumtaz [58:26] But that being said, Phantom, I believe, is adding ZK compression tokens today.


Anna Rose [58:32] Cool


Mert Mumtaz [58:32] So that goes to show you, like it does have adoption and certain projects are already using it for their tokens as well.


Anna Rose [58:39] Nice. Now, I just have a question. Just generally, I'm just curious and really it might be the corner of X that I'm paying attention to, but like memecoins and Solana. Like it's a narrative that has moved together. And I just wonder, at this moment, snapshot, what's your feeling about it? Is it forever? Do you want it to be forever? Is it dead? Is it dying?


Tarun Chitra [59:03] Is love forever? This is like asking that the same kind of philosophical question.


Mert Mumtaz [59:11] I get asked this actually relatively frequently. So my answer is pretty generic at this point. And so, okay, basically, if you look at the history of crypto, the thing that has the most PMF is generally speculation in different forms, right? So you have ICO, NFTs, memecoins, dog coins, L1 forks, all these different things. I would even put governance coins in some regard to that category.


Anna Rose [59:35] Yeah.


Mert Mumtaz [59:35] And so it's almost always the same thing. And we can debate for why that is, and I think it's probably due to poor regulation, but that is the case. Like that is the big thing. And so that's very general to all of crypto. It's not -- so when NFTs happened, for example, they run OpenSea on ETH L1, and then they run Magic Eden on Solana L1, and then they run Bitcoin. And so they were everywhere with.


With memecoins, it's just the latest form of this. And it ended up being on Solana because -- well, I think a few reasons. One is that I think creating tokens on Solana is, again, you don't have to write a contract, you just click the button. That's it. Yeah, it's easier. Phantom is already integrated and you don't have the temporary problem, at least of this fragmentation between the different systems of rollups. You just do it on Solana. And so you take all those, and then there's Jupiter, there's all these TGBots, there's Pump.fun, obviously.


Fom Solana's point of view, it's like decentralized Nasdaq. And what that means is we want to enable the trading of assets at the fastest speeds possible as affordably as possible in a decentralized system. Now, the names of those assets can be NFTs, or they can be USDC, or it can be memecoins. And today, it just happens to be the case that most of crypto is in the memecoin phase, and most of that happens on Solana.


But from our perspective as core devs, let's say we don't care. It's a really good stress test. Like, we wouldn't have been able to handle the memecoin craze that just happened were it not for NFT craze a few years ago that made us improve the core system to not go down again in cases like this. There are some promising things, like the stablecoin supply on Solana more than doubled since the Trump launch, for example. And then many more RWAs started launching like tokenized Gold, Franklin Templeton just expanded slot today, for example. And by the way, like other ecosystem like Avalanche had a memecoin fund, Base is, obviously, very involved in trying to get that going. I still view AI agents as memecoins.


Tarun Chitra [01:01:49] I said this on a podcast the other day, which is if you're targeting anyone 25 and older, you can go to L2s. If you're targeting people 25 and under for memecoins, you have to go to Solana. There's like -- it's a very age bifurcated universe. I hate to say it. I mean, that's why I think all the L2 memecoins are things that are only funny to millennials. It's sad, but it's true. It's like, it's just --


Anna Rose [01:02:15] Oh, yeah, the age graph is real. It's funny. When you talk about it being the Nasdaq, I start to be like, so are the memecoins kind of like penny stocks, like in the future? Is that what they kind of become?


Tarun Chitra [01:02:25] Sure.


Anna Rose [01:02:25] Yeah. Although, I don't know, are penny stocks on the Nasdaq actually? Are they officially listed?


Tarun Chitra [01:02:33] Well, there's like the OTC, Pink Sheets, whatever stuff.


Anna Rose [01:02:36] Okay. Yeah. I wonder if there will be -- because that's another thing you just described, like how easy it is to launch a token. I feel like in the past you could launch a token on Ethereum pretty easy. I mean, yes, you had to deploy a contract, but there were websites that made it like almost a button, but it wouldn't get listed. It was impossible to find.


Tarun Chitra [01:02:53] Well, I think the most important thing about pump.fun style mechanisms versus all the historical stuff is, A, it took a bonding curve. So you put in some money and then you get some fraction of the tokens. And then once enough people put in money into the bonding curve, it converts to an AMM, and then it burns the token. So there's no wallet owner of the LP pool. So that means that the person who created the token can't just remove all the liquidity and immediately rug you.


Now, there are other ways they can do that, via sniping the pool and whatever. But just at least at face value, it's actually a lot better. Because, there have been all these social token things for years and whatever, and they all just use bonding curves, but the bonding curves would basically get manipulated, and there wasn't like a free market to trade it. So the idea that the bonding curve converts to an AMM pool was like the main innovation in my mind.


Anna Rose [01:03:48] The main -- that's cool.


Tarun Chitra [01:03:49] Although, of course, if I'm running MEV bot, as soon as it converts and I snipe all the tokens and I've basically gotten rid of that. But it took people a while to -- you know, a few months before I think that kind of flipped from like the fair launch. Everything in crypto, to Mert's point is like, all of these things have something similar. They all start with this ethos of fair launching, right? That the supply will be distributed fairly, and within a couple months the market figures out a way to make them not fair launches.


Anna Rose [01:04:19] To game it. Amazing. So true.


Tarun Chitra [01:04:19] But that's sort of the cat and mouse game of all tokens, I think.


Anna Rose [01:04:25] Memecoins have been around a lot for a long time. NFTs were around for a very long time before they became popular. What do you think exists today that could be the next generation kind of speculative asset or speculative object mechanism? I wonder if you'd spot it on Solana. Could be AI maybe?


Mert Mumtaz [01:04:46] No, no. Yeah. People used to tell me AI, and one of my hot predictions for 2025 was that AI will die by the -- or AI tokens will die by -- and it seems like that's actually already happened.


Anna Rose [01:04:57] Faster.


Mert Mumtaz [01:04:58] So it took much, much, much -- I know Tarun loves the DeSci stuff.


Anna Rose [01:05:01] Oh, DeSci will be it. DeSci will be it.


Tarun Chitra [01:05:04] True scams. True scams. True scams. Please do not.


Anna Rose [01:05:09] Could be RWAs. They never really had their moment.


Tarun Chitra [01:05:12] CZ is really shilling DeSci though. So I feel like I'm probably going to get overrun by CZ, unfortunately.


Mert Mumtaz [01:05:22] I think it'll be, if it does happen -- it'll probably be more SocialFi oriented because, I think this has been tried many times, and hasn't worked.


Anna Rose [01:05:30] Yeah.


Mert Mumtaz [01:05:30] And so it's like probably somebody's learned from his mistake at some point in how to do SocialFi less incorrectly.


Anna Rose [01:05:38] And when you say that, do you mean like the friend.tech kind of SocialFi or do you mean like launching a token into a social network? Because I also think that has never been successfully done. Like Telegram has tried a couple times and it hasn't quite worked. But if X was to do it, maybe that would work.


Mert Mumtaz [01:05:56] Well, something that could be successful that's already doing quite well is like Kaito with the YAPS, right? That's like SocialFi in a sense. You talk socially and then you earn some points and those points presumably give you some tokens or something maybe. So social intelligence and financializing that somewhat. And I know of at least four or five big SocialFi apps coming to Solana. I think that Clout one just launched and a bunch of other. There's like time.fun. So I think those have a good shot, but I have no idea, honestly.


Tarun Chitra [01:06:30] Okay. I have a question for you for a 2025 prediction, which is how long do you think the "dot fun" domain lasts? Does it still grow to the end of the year or does it fizzle off the way "dot xyz" kind of fizzled off?


Mert Mumtaz [01:06:43] That's a good question. I think something that will keep it alive is Solana mobile launching. And I think they will try to be like, oh, we're very mobile focused and stuff. And I think there'll be a new wave of those with the mobile stuff. And I think it lasts 2025. I don't think it lasts much longer than that, but it definitely lasts a year in my view.


Anna Rose [01:07:09] I also don't think it's full mainstream yet. I think it has space. There's too many things that have not been "dot fun".


Tarun Chitra [01:07:15] I mean, SocialFi does remind me of NFTs in one way. When I think about NFTs in 2017, like CryptoKitties, they had this huge boom, the way friend.tech did, and then it crashed the same way.


Anna Rose [01:07:28] And it took like dead for three years.


Tarun Chitra [01:07:31] More than that, right? It's 2021. Really?


Anna Rose [01:07:33] Really?


Tarun Chitra [01:07:33] Yeah. Like four years. So --


Anna Rose [01:07:363] Dead.


Tarun Chitra [01:07:36] SocialFi, I do -- I kind of agree with you. It could have a rebirth, but it --


Anna Rose [01:07:41] And people hate that shit though. Well, maybe they hated NFTs too, at the beginning.


Mert Mumtaz [01:07:46] You know, one thing that I think is super under the radar and has not really worked, but I think could is like, these sports tokens.


Anna Rose [01:07:56] Oh, yeah.


Mert Mumtaz [01:07:57] Like Karate Combat.


Anna Rose [01:07:59] There was that basketball one that, like, the CryptoKitty people had done. What was it? That was the initial NFT thing in 2021. What was this? NBA HotShots or something like this?


Mert Mumtaz [01:08:10] Top Shot.


Anna Rose [01:08:11] Top Shot, exactly.


Mert Mumtaz [01:08:12] Yeah. I think some of these sports ones, I know a few teams launching something around this soon, and it seems a little -- because the athletes tend to be very crypto forward, let's say. And I haven't seen anybody really talk about it. And so it's pretty under the radar. And so that alone could be like, oh, wow, let's not miss out on this thing that we just found out about. So perhaps that's another option.


Anna Rose [01:08:39] Cool. I feel like we veered off our serious ZK conversation into, like what's cool next.


Tarun Chitra [01:08:47] We have the President of Helium here as Mert would like to say.


Mert Mumtaz [01:08:54] Yes. People actually believe that. The other day they launched a free phone plan and I put my phone code because they gave me an invite code for signing up free. And [?] serious people, like VC started reaching out to me like, hey, I'm sorry, we can work together on Helius, but Helium looks pretty cool. And I was like, what the hell?


Anna Rose [01:09:14] Nice. Mert, thanks so much for coming on the show, for sharing the story of your involvement with Solana, Solana's evolution, this sort of survey of ZK being used, and other kinds of cryptography being used in the Solana ecosystem, and some of your ideas about what could be coming next. Yeah, thanks for that.


Mert Mumtaz [01:09:33] Of course. Thanks for having me.


Anna Rose [01:09:35] Thank you, Tarun, as always.


Tarun Chitra [01:09:36] Yeah. Excited to be here. Someone's gotta be the unruly American in the podcast, so.


Anna Rose [01:09:41] I'm glad we had you. I wanna say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik and Tanya, and to our listeners, thanks for listening.