[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:10)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Guillermo and I chat with Josh Yang, CEO and co-founder of Brightlight Photonics. In this episode, we revisit the topic of quantum computers, something we first covered in episode 357 with Jelena Vukovic, who also happened to be Josh's PhD advisor at Stanford. This time around, we look at a less discussed part of the stack, that is the lasers that power these systems.


Josh, with some help from Guillermo, walk us through how lasers are used to cool atoms and to keep them in position, as well as perform read-write operations in Neutral Atom and other atom-based quantum platforms. Josh shares why the bulky, expensive lasers these systems rely on have become a bottleneck. And we then dig into how Brightlight is shrinking the titanium sapphire laser, long considered the backbone of quantum optics, from a tabletop system down to a chip.


And along the way, he shares what it takes to build a new laser platform from the ground up. So when it comes to lasers, I am really starting from scratch. I have actually zero knowledge — excuse the pun — about them.


And so, I really did need to ask a lot of basic questions at the start. As we had a chance to dig deeper, we had a chance to learn about the cutting-edge techniques used in the field, as well as the power these tiny lasers could unlock. It's an episode that's outside of our usual wheelhouse, but I do hope you'll enjoy.


Now, here is our interview with Josh Yang from Brightlight Photonics. Today, Guillermo and I are here with Josh Yang, CEO and co-founder of Brightlight Photonics. Welcome to the show, Josh.


[Josh Yang] (2:10 - 2:12)
Hi, Anna. Thanks for having me.


[Anna Rose] (2:12 - 2:37)
So, Guillermo, this episode came about in part because you and Josh have known each other from your past, and you knew that I wanted to kind of continue on the quantum computer track. Now, what we're going to talk about today is not exactly the quantum side. It's more about some of the tools that actually power those systems.


Guillermo, maybe you can share a little bit about how you know Josh and how all of this came together.


[Josh Yang] (2:37 - 3:09)
Yeah. I mean, the quick of it is Josh and I met during the PhD. I think we both started the PhD around the same time.


Josh, obviously doing actually useful things like experimental physics, and me doing decidedly less useful things like non-experimental physics. And then I think he graduated. And then we didn't chat for a while, which is funny.


And then recently caught up, maybe a few months ago, and I realised we were starting this company. And so, we kept on chatting since. And I was like, yeah, I know we need to have Josh on the show.


He'd be a great, great guest.


[Anna Rose] (3:10 - 3:17)
Cool. So, Josh, tell us a bit about what you were studying and how you basically got to founding Brightlight Photonics.


[Josh Yang] (3:18 - 4:55)
Yeah, of course. So, when I started in Jelena's group, I was working. I did use lasers, but I wasn't working specifically on lasers.


Instead, I was working on spin qubits and materials like silicon carbide and diamond. So, I was making a lot of these devices. I was in the clean room in a bunny suit and gown fabricating chips.


And I think the reality of it is we were doing pretty exciting work. You could have a small chip that would fit on the tip of your finger and it could have thousands of devices on and all these quantum, let's say, devices and spin qubits or atoms or colour centres, as we would call them. But the reality behind it was that even though you would have a chip that has so many devices and you could get a nice publication, you get nice press, amazing photos, what's left out is the huge optical setup that powers this chip.


You have this huge table. You have all these mirrors. And worst of all, you have these big bulky lasers that's powering a single chip.


So, during the second half of my PhD, that was instead focused on, okay, we can make these quantum devices smaller and smaller. Well, can we make these lasers smaller as well? Because if the lasers are needed to power the chip, if the lasers remain big, expensive, then the solution still remains big and expensive.


And that's what led to starting Brightlight Photonics, where we are making these high-performance lasers, but chip scale.


[Anna Rose] (4:56 - 5:29)
Cool. It's interesting because we on this show often talk about cryptography and how cryptography or an algorithm will be like interfacing with the quantum computer. But what you're talking about is like kind of the inner workings of this quantum computer, in this case, a photonic, like a light-based, I don't know if that's actually how you call it, but a type of quantum computer that relies on photonics.


I didn't even think about the laser, actually. I didn't even think about the light. So, I'm very excited that we get a chance to explore that sort of part of it.


[Josh Yang] (5:29 - 6:12)
Exactly. Yeah, it's crazy. There's like so many things that go into even just think of a normal computer, right?


Like, yeah, there's the CPU, which exists, and that's super cool. But like to have that work, you need to also have memory and hard drive and a power source and like a PCB that like actually connects everything and like all the stuff, right? And there's an equivalent version of that in the quantum realm, but even in the sensing realm in general, which is you need lasers to be able to like measure things and be able to observe things and all this.


That's how you interact with these things in the first place. But yeah, these lasers are often like hundreds of thousands of dollars and they're huge boxes sitting in a separate room. And you know, the output is a single fibre optic cable, so it's like a tiny thing, but like the box that you need is huge to be able to even make that.


[Anna Rose] (6:12 - 6:44)
The original laser, like the lasers that you were interfacing with at first, are those devices that also require a tonne of cooling? I mean, lasers don't get hot, right? By the way, total laser noob here.


I actually just learned this week that laser might be an acronym. Like I really don't know anything about lasers. So maybe we should first describe what is a laser?


Is it an acronym? And is there any heat? And yeah, is there any cooling basically in the quantum case?


I realise there's four questions here, but maybe you can help me understand.


[Josh Yang] (6:45 - 8:58)
Yeah, yeah. So first of all, laser is an acronym. And I mean, I think I have it right, but it stands for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.


That's what it stands for. So the short of it is what that means. What does light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation?


It means that it's actually a quantum property actually that lasers operate. So your barcode scanner at the grocery store or the Vixels that power face ID in your iPhone, all of these are real quantum technologies that operate on a principle that there is a property of these materials where if you send a photon, a single particle of light in, and you provide this crystal with energy, stimulated emission is what happens when this photon enters this crystal. And it basically produces another photon that matches the same energy direction properties of that incoming photon.


And that's why for lasers, instead of having light going in all these different directions, like you would have in a light bulb or an LED, for instance, you have a very collimated beam that is a very specific colour. Exactly. And it can go in one kind of single direction.


And so that's what a laser is. And sorry, what were your other three questions? Do lasers produce heat?


Yes. So lasers actually do definitely produce heat, some more than others. So specifically, the laser that we were working with at Stanford for our quantum experiments was called a titanium doped sapphire laser or Ti sapphire laser for short.


So it actually produced so much heat in these crystals that one of the challenges of a lot of Ti sapphire laser systems is that you need sophisticated cooling of the crystal itself. So air cooling sometimes isn't sufficient, you might even need water cooled systems, you need external chillers. So in addition to this big laser, you have a big chiller that's just kind of running in the background as well.


[Anna Rose] (8:59 - 9:18)
Got it. So I'm starting, I think we're starting to see a bit of a picture of that other side of the equation, this large, very expensive laser, a cooling device next to it. What else is in that setup that's kind of like projecting the light or getting the photons, I guess, the source of the photons?


[Josh Yang] (9:19 - 9:39)
Guillermo, do you want to take a stab at it? I'm happy to. So yeah, so I'm happy to do it just like really quickly.


Your point about the source of the photon is like, okay, where do the come from? So often you have a laser is like a medium, right? Like this crystal that, um, Josh was talking about, but you have to provide that medium with some light.


[Guillermo Angeris] (9:39 - 9:39)
Yeah.


[Josh Yang] (9:40 - 10:05)
Not just the energy itself to like stimulate, you know, to like have the atoms or things inside be like wiggling enough to be able to emit light, but you also have to put light in for it to like emit light in the same direction. So there's a pump and a pump can be a lot of things, you know, in, in the good old days when lasers were first started, uh, the pump, the thing that actually gave the initial photons to this thing where it was originally a, like a flash bulb.


[Anna Rose] (10:05 - 10:05)
Okay.


[Josh Yang] (10:06 - 11:27)
Um, nowadays it's fancier. Nowadays you have, uh, all sorts of stuff, right? Like, uh, you could have LEDs themselves can act as pumps in certain cases and things like that.


So that's one part. And then finally you need to like then connect this whole contraption that you have now made to like a fibre optic cable. So you can actually get the laser light out.


Wow. And like direct it to where you want things like that. So lasers are like relatively simple device.


It's just like a thing. Do you excited enough to be able to like produce more photons and then you have to feed it photons and you have to collect the light out somewhere in some direction. I don't know.


Did I miss anything? I think. Yeah, I think, I think you've covered it.


Uh, I think the maybe best way to sort of describe that process that talking about is that, uh, lasers need a source of, of that energy. So what we call it is, I guess, a pump. Um, and in, in different kinds of lasers, you can pump that energy via electrical injection.


Uh, so, but in oftentimes, uh, specific demanding laser requirements need an optical pump, so they can be pumped by another laser as well. Um, so, so it can get complicated pretty quickly and you have all these different modules working together. And if just one thing goes wrong, then the full thing goes down.


[Anna Rose] (11:28 - 11:41)
I have a visual image, which may be completely from sci-fi movies, but I picture sort of like multiple laser beams kind of headed towards one larger beam. Is that at all what it looks like under the hood?


[Josh Yang] (11:42 - 12:37)
Yeah. Uh, so in most systems, like a music video, I'm so sorry. I love it.


That's awesome. Rather than multiple beams coming together for one, it's more like one in an optically pumped system. For example, it's more like one beam hits a crystal and then that crystal emits another beam in reality around that game medium, that crystal, you have mirrors that actually form the, what we call cavity where the light can basically make round trips back and forth and increase in power until you get this strong laser output.


Um, but then after the full laser system itself, you still have a tonne of mirrors on your optical table that you need to align to make sure that you get it precisely into your chip, for instance. Um, and then all these different parts and pieces that make the experiment work.


[Anna Rose] (12:38 - 12:59)
I remember sort of seeing a visual depiction of some of the chips where there was sort of these like various colours. And I'm just curious, like the laser coming into this chip, hitting the chip, what actually is happening? Where does it go?


Is it bouncing around? I mean, I'm thinking if it's quantum, then there's some sort of entanglement.


[Josh Yang] (12:59 - 15:01)
Yeah. So it probably depends at least a little bit on what kind of device you have on your chip, but let's just say, how did we use lasers in our experiments at Stanford, at least when we were making these devices on chips. So essentially what you have is you have miniature optical fibres on chip instead of having, so optical fibres are, you can say that they're made basically out of glass, glass strands that are pulled very thin and due to index of refraction, light is able to basically follow the fibre.


Well, you can replicate that similarly, but instead using a chip scale device where now your optical fibre core is not hundreds of microns, it is maybe one micron or hundreds of nanometres. And how you get the laser on chip is you need to make sure that the light is focused onto the tip of the wave guide, aligning with this very small spot size. Once the light gets onto the chip, it actually becomes a lot more simpler because with lithographic techniques, that essentially allows you to transfer whatever computer pattern you have to your chip.


So you design the layout of your chip, get it onto the chip. And once you have light onto that chip, you're able to route it, use it for whatever experiment or design functions that you've made your chip to do. I know I just kind of dropped a lot of different parts on there, but that's essentially how it works.


Yeah. I'm going to keep the analogy of like two computers, just like fibre optic cables or wires effectively for light. Right.


That's pretty simple. And then you have like devices, which could be all sorts of stuff like nonlinear materials or in your case, Josh, colour centres, which effectively act depending on how you use them, it could act as qubits type of thing and all sorts of things of that form.


[Anna Rose] (15:02 - 15:08)
What about the actual quantum properties though? Where and when is that actually happening?


[Josh Yang] (15:08 - 16:23)
Yeah. So it's very system dependent, but I think taking a step back, the reason why lasers are so important for a lot of these atom based quantum systems is you can use these atoms in really exciting ways, whether they're neutral atoms, trapped ions, defects, for instance, which are kind of like artificial atoms within a crystal. And they have different energy levels.


And as a result, you can use them for quantum computing, quantum sensing, memory, all these sorts of things. The tricky thing about the atom is how do we talk to the atom? How do we control the atom, get the energy to move between different states or change between different states?


Light is the perfect medium for it because all these energy states have specific defined transitions with different energy levels. So that means if we send a laser that has the right energy, that allows us to talk to the atom to either extract the information or manipulate it. So that's why bringing light onto a chip that has these atoms, for instance, is really important for these experiments.


[Anna Rose] (16:23 - 16:57)
You just mentioned neutral atoms. And I was going to ask, I was thinking actually later to ask if the type of lasers you're describing also are used in that context. I have yet to do a proper episode, I feel, on neutral atoms.


So I'm not, I'm sort of like vaguely aware of what that is. But yeah, I'm just like, you mentioned a few different types of quantum computers and they're all using, are they all using the same laser or are those lasers, do they need to be very different to interface with these mediums?


[Josh Yang] (16:57 - 18:26)
This is like a loaded question. In your case specifically, Josh. So the simple answer is no, they don't use the same kind of laser.


And this is actually one of the biggest difficulties, I would say, in the, say, atom-based quantum computing or even general quantum technology sectors that the industry faces today is because I mentioned that in order to talk, say, to a qubit or an atom, you need the energy of your light to match the energy of your transition. Well, within a neutral atom system, the energy transitions that you need to actually fully make a quantum computer to do all the different operations or things that you need to do in general, they require a lot of different energies. So that means just for one system, you then need a lot of different laser colours as well.


Now, if you're using a different atom, well, once again, you have a lot of different colours. And say now you're using trapped ions, which aren't neutral atoms, again, a lot of different colours. So fundamentally, yes, they're all lasers, but they're also different lasers as well.


So it is a pretty difficult problem often to manufacture or even support all these lasers that are needed at these different wavelengths and properties for quantum systems.


[Anna Rose] (18:27 - 18:42)
Can I ask you, since we just mentioned neutral atoms, can I ask you a question about something that I heard about neutral atoms, which is that, as I understand it, the atoms are being held in place by like laser tweezers. Is that an actual thing?


[Josh Yang] (18:42 - 19:27)
Yeah, so it is true. So in neutral atom systems, individual atoms, they're often like held in place by tightly focused laser beams, which are called optical tweezers. So you're mentioning tweezers.


Yes, exactly. Almost got it. But lasers are used for many different purposes.


So in addition to having lasers that are used to these atoms in place with optical tweezers, they are also used to potentially, say, read out the state of the qubit. They're used to manipulate the state of the qubit. So this is what leads to all these different functionalities that lasers are used for even within a single quantum computing architecture.


[Anna Rose] (19:28 - 19:50)
And you just mentioned different colours. So I'm guessing that the different purposes, different kind of, this laser is for the optical tweezer, and this is for manipulating the state. I don't know if I'm saying that right.


But would those have different colours, different frequencies? Or are they completely different constructions?


[Josh Yang] (19:52 - 20:41)
So they would have different frequencies, yeah. So for example, let's take an example of rubidium. It's a very common neutral atom platform.


So your optical tweezers would often be at a wavelength around 850 nanometres, whereas some other lasers that you would need for cooling of the atom would be at around 780 nanometres. Then you might have additional lasers that are used to, say, interface with the state of the qubit. You could find them within the violet range or even further into the infrared.


So a lot of different frequencies, wavelengths, energies that are needed to interact with these different transitions.


[Anna Rose] (20:42 - 20:54)
And you just said that lasers, you have some lasers that are actually doing the cooling. So if I get this right, the laser itself needs cooling, and then a laser can cool. Is this true?


[Josh Yang] (20:55 - 20:59)
Yes. Yes. This is actually the craziest thing.


[Anna Rose] (20:59 - 21:00)
How does a laser cool? I always thought lasers burn.


[Josh Yang] (21:01 - 22:11)
So lasers do burn, but it turns out if you're like, you know, big brain about it, you can cool with lasers. This is like, all this shit is insane. So okay, so yeah.


So to be clear, we are using lasers for, I guess we've now named four things or five things. So manipulating the atom, like literally physically in space, right? Like moving the atom via optical tweezers, reading out into the atom and writing in whatever, like in some sense, like manipulating the state of the atom itself, not the position in XY space.


Cooling the atom, right? Separately. And then there was one more, I just totally kind of miss it.


I think the write and read can span different specific operations. One thing I should clarify is that I'm not a quantum computing expert per se. I don't build these Neutral Atom systems, but as someone who is building lasers for these systems, that is kind of where my knowledge and expertise is coming from.


But yeah, depending on the architecture, you can need a lot of different lasers to do these operations that you need to actually manipulate the state of the qubit, let's say. Okay.


[Anna Rose] (22:11 - 22:14)
But then you have read, or maybe if you want to separate read and write.


[Josh Yang] (22:14 - 22:20)
Yeah. Maybe read and write could be different ish. Move or hold.


Physically in space and then cool.


[Anna Rose] (22:20 - 22:20)
Okay.


[Josh Yang] (22:21 - 22:24)
And okay. So what the hell is cooling? Like, what does it mean to cool something with a laser?


[Anna Rose] (22:24 - 22:24)
Yeah.


[Josh Yang] (22:25 - 22:35)
I was going to like, I'm going to try to give a five minute version of it, which is, so you know, when an ambulance is coming at you, the pitch rises and then when it goes away from you, the pitch falls.


[Anna Rose] (22:35 - 22:36)
Yes.


[Josh Yang] (22:36 - 25:22)
Right. That's just because of like, like the relative velocity of you and the way the ambulance is like increasing. And then like, yeah, it's like, there's called the Doppler effect effectively.


So it's like, as like you have something that's effectively going towards you, like the frequency or the pitch of whatever it is actually increases and then decreases as you go away. This is true for light as well. So, okay.


What is like, taking a step back, what is like heat in an atom? It's like, the thing is jiggling in space. Like, it's like physically jiggling and like that is temperature, right?


Like that is like, the more it jiggles, roughly speaking, the more kinetic energy it has or whatever. It is like higher temperature. So to cool something effectively means to like reduce the wiggles.


Okay. So here's something very fucking crazy. So if you shine a laser on an atom that is wiggling, so you want to cool this atom, right?


So let's start with just like a laser in one direction. This thing is wiggling and the atom can absorb or emit a photon. I'm not going to get super particular about this, but that is slightly, let's say it's slightly above the frequency of a laser.


So what happens? The atom is wiggling in space. Every once in a while, the atom will wiggle in the direction of the laser.


So if the atom were stationary, it cannot absorb or emit light because the laser frequency is slightly below the frequency that the atom can absorb or emit. But every once in a while, as it's wiggling randomly, it will wiggle towards the laser. And that will mean that the laser, from the perspective of the atom, is pitched slightly above, you know, much like the same way that like as an ambulance coming towards you, the pitch rises or the pitch is higher, right?


The atom will see the light as if it was slightly more blue, which means that it will be able to absorb a photon, right? Which means that so when it absorbs the photon, the atom loses velocity in that direction. So it slows down and then re-emits it kind of arbitrarily in any direction.


So on average, in that direction, the atom is slowing down. Now, put a bunch of lasers in all different directions and you slow it down on average. So whichever way it wiggles, there's always a laser that's like in that direction.


It absorbs that laser, like the photon specifically, and then re-emits it roughly.


[Anna Rose] (25:22 - 25:23)
And it causes it to wiggle less.


[Josh Yang] (25:23 - 25:24)
Correct.


[Anna Rose] (25:24 - 25:28)
But it's not like bumping up against the laser. It's not because I mean...


[Josh Yang] (25:28 - 25:29)
No. This is just the light.


[Anna Rose] (25:29 - 25:33)
The way I visualise this is almost like it counteracts its movement.


[Josh Yang] (25:33 - 25:59)
Yes, that's exactly how you should picture it. So people, I think there's a term that people have for this. I think it's quite descriptive.


It's called optical molasses. I don't know if that's the Josh, but that's roughly right, which effectively like it's almost like wading through sand. Like every time you try to move, there's always like a thing preventing you from moving too much in one direction.


And if you do it over all directions, you get cooling. Brings down the temperature.


[Anna Rose] (25:59 - 26:00)
Crazy.


[Josh Yang] (26:00 - 26:18)
Yes. Importantly, this cooling is separate from the tweezers that are holding it in place, which is more due to creating like an electric field, for instance, that keeps the atom in place. So a lot of different functions going on at the same time.


[Anna Rose] (26:18 - 26:48)
Okay, so there's these different lasers. Thank you so much, by the way, Guillermo, for explaining how they actually cool. But maybe it makes sense to talk about some of these other ways that lasers are interacting with these atoms.


So like the tweezers, I mean, I don't mean to be fixated on the tweezers, but I find it such a crazy idea. How do you use light and lasers to keep something still? Like you just talked about kind of it interacting with, you know, movement.


[Josh Yang] (26:50 - 28:25)
Yeah, so I think the best way to think about it is when you have your laser, your optical tweezer, that is essentially a laser focused on your atom. Because of how the laser is tightly focused, it has, it's the brightest at the centre and gets a weaker away from the focus of the laser. So the intensity of the laser then changes with position.


And we can kind of call this a spatial gradient, I would say, the atom now that is within this path, the energy depends on this local intensity. And as a result, the spatial gradient basically creates a force that just pushes brings the atom back to the the centre of the beam. Just because this this gradient means that if you if you have it at a specific wavelength or colour of light, the atom is at the lowest energy, I would say potential energy when it's at the highest intensity.


So as a result, you can kind of think of it as almost like, I guess, Guillermo, this, this is essentially a well of sorts. But physically, you can think of the analogue to it as being a almost microscopic bowl, where the bottom of the bowl, the lowest potential energy is where the beam is the brightest. So you move the laser a little bit around, you shift the bowl, and the atom rolls back, say, to the centre of it.


[Anna Rose] (28:26 - 28:43)
So is it just a single laser, though? Because what I'm now picturing, if you're using these lasers to cool, you kind of painted a picture of many lasers pointed at a single point. But then are the tweezers also like set up all around it and pointing at the same point?


[Josh Yang] (28:45 - 28:51)
So at the simplest level, yes, actually, a tweezer can be made from just one tightly focused laser beam, because...


[Anna Rose] (28:51 - 28:54)
Oh, it could be from one? It doesn't need like a ring around?


[Josh Yang] (28:55 - 29:54)
Exactly. Because the laser itself has one spot that is narrowest. And honestly, all three are spatial dimensions.


So as you send a laser along, of course, you can imagine, say, the laser as a cylinder, let's say. So that creates your spatial narrowing or restrictions, I guess, in two axes. But then in the third axis, the laser beam often has what we call a waist as well.


That means it basically focusses down to a tighter point. So with your waist and then with your cylinder, that creates all three spatial, I guess, restrictions that allow you to manipulate the position. And as a result, just one laser can be used at the simplest level as an optical tweezer.


[Anna Rose] (29:55 - 30:00)
Crazy. In practise, is it usually just one or is there usually more than one used?


[Josh Yang] (30:01 - 30:21)
So usually my understanding is that there's just one, but that's per atom. So in an actual quantum computer, you need lots and lots of physical atoms. So that means you need all these different lasers for every single atom to keep it in the place that you want.


[Anna Rose] (30:21 - 30:42)
Wild. Okay, what about the read-write? What are those doing?


Because now I'm picturing, and also, are all of these lasers different colours and different widths? If you were to visualise it, do they look very different or does it all look like the same thing?


[Josh Yang] (30:43 - 30:56)
They're different colours. Yeah, they're different colours, for sure. You probably wouldn't actually be able to see the different colours because they may lie outside the visible spectrum of light, but they are different wavelengths, for instance.


[Anna Rose] (30:58 - 31:01)
Are they also different thicknesses?


[Josh Yang] (31:03 - 32:40)
That's a good question, actually. Because they are different colours, technically, yes. The minimum waist size, we were just talking about it, actually will depend on the colour.


It's roughly on the order of the the wavelength of light. It's the smallest wave size. Not quite, it's a little.


There's some numerical aperture stuff you have to think about, but yes. So therefore, the smallest possible beam will actually depend on the colour. If it's very far in the infrared, it's going to be thicker.


And if it's very far towards blue light, which I don't know actually how much blue light, I think it's green is the highest they use for neutral atom platforms, but I don't remember. It could be thinner and smaller. That actually is weird, and it has weird relationships also with how you even manufacture chips.


And this is why it turns out to be very hard to make chips where transistors are really, really small, is because we use light for those. And there's all sorts of cool things that are downstream of the fact that the smallest size is depending on the wavelength. But yes, they're all different colours.


There's a bunch of different ones coming in from all these. You can imagine how much of a pain in the ass it is to have a gajillion lasers that all need to do all of these different tasks, all of these different colours, all of the stuff. Some of them are huge, some of them are slightly less huge, but overall still pretty big.


There's cooling in the middle of this. And that's not even talking about the cooling of the atoms. It's talking about the cooling of the lasers that you then use the atoms.


So you can imagine how actually insanely complicated these machines are, even the 100-qubit ones. So enter Josh. Sorry, anyways.


[Anna Rose] (32:41 - 32:43)
Well, I actually have a few more questions.


[Guillermo Angeris] (32:43 - 32:43)
Please.


[Anna Rose] (32:44 - 33:13)
I have a high-level laser question all of a sudden because now I'm obsessed with the thickness. And I know that maybe I'm completely off-base. Is a laser just a single wavelength?


Or is it a lot of...what consists of that light? Because I mean, obviously, again, going to the sci-fi image, it looks like a beam of light that has a certain width. So is that actually what they look like at this level?


Or are they so microscopic that you don't think about them that way?


[Josh Yang] (33:14 - 34:29)
Yeah, so I would say that the...I mean, visually, you probably won't be able to see that the width of light is very different. Generally speaking, lasers have a few specific properties. One is that...and I say they generally have this because technically there are lasers that maybe don't abide by certain things like this. But first of all, they are monochromatic. So that does mean that indeed, they have one colour, one specific wavelength. And secondly, because the photon that is emitted from the laser has the same properties as the photon that was coming into the laser, they also go in one direction.


And that results in a beam of light that you can see. Now, of course, you can use different kinds of optics to focus the beam to a spot or expand the beam. Those are different things that you can do.


But what we are often seeing when you do see a laser beam, and oh, it looks like it has some width, is often just the scattering in atmosphere.


[Guillermo Angeris] (34:30 - 34:32)
Of dust that's getting caught on the light. Exactly.


[Josh Yang] (34:33 - 34:37)
And that causes it to have this kind of glow, I would say, around the beam itself.


[Anna Rose] (34:37 - 35:00)
In the case of these computers, though, are they working in a space where there's zero dust? You talked about these clean rooms and stuff. Does it have to be perfectly dust free when you're actually using the laser or only when you're building the laser or only when you're building the quantum chips?


When do you need it to be perfectly dust free?


[Josh Yang] (35:00 - 35:39)
So within these quantum computing systems, yeah, dust is bad. It's very bad. Essentially, everything within your quantum computer is super sensitive.


The best way to cleanly interact with your atoms is, say, with light, and you don't want other kinds of particles, especially not, honestly, rather macroscopic ones like dust to be in the system itself. You don't want to accidentally measure your qubit or disturb your qubit measurement by measuring a dust bunny somewhere in the lab. That would be very unfortunate for many reasons.


Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (35:40 - 35:58)
So in this case, what we are describing, these lasers pointing at the same place, the tweezers, and maybe all of these different coloured lasers in a setting like you described, you would not see anything. It would just be going through space. You would never see beams of light.


[Josh Yang] (35:58 - 37:07)
There are some colours of light that you would see. For example, oftentimes, you have near UV or violet wavelengths are sometimes used for these atoms. I didn't know that, actually.


I always thought it was sub 500 or so. Yeah, it really does depend. So I think for rubidium, for example, one common wavelength is at the blue-violet-indigo region around like 400, 420 nanometres or something like that.


So you'll see a bright glow of blue or purple there, actually. Cool. When I was saying like, oh, the waste size depends on the wavelength, this is just jumping back a little bit.


I mean to say the maximum you can focus the beam is dependent on the wavelength. But in general, the width of the beam that you see comes from atmosphere effects, but it also can be itself. The laser itself can be wide in a broad sense that is dependent on the laser itself, not the properties of light.


[Anna Rose] (37:08 - 37:11)
The mirrors and sort of how everything has been focused.


[Josh Yang] (37:11 - 37:38)
Yeah, exactly. You can imagine having a really big laser that's like a huge mirror. Not that you would, but you can actually make accidental, they're not quite lasers, but I'm going to call them lasers, like lasers from supernova dust.


And so you see them pointed at you type of thing. So it's crazy. It could be very, very large.


It could be very, very small, but the size is more about how much you can tightly focus it. And that has implications for the tweezers and stuff.


[Anna Rose] (37:38 - 37:44)
But that's why if you're at the atom level, I'm assuming these are teeny tiny, right?


[Josh Yang] (37:45 - 37:54)
Yes. Yeah, yeah, yeah. They are on the order of hundreds of nanometres often, hundreds to maybe a thousand nanometres, but it depends on the wavelength of light that you're using because that's the best you can do.


[Anna Rose] (37:55 - 38:08)
All right. I want to ask about the read-write part or the read and the write. You sort of said they're different.


How, so what are you even doing when you're reading or writing? Maybe should we separate those?


[Josh Yang] (38:08 - 38:51)
Sure. We can look at them separately. So when you're working with a qubit, a qubit needs to have two different states.


And oftentimes within these atoms, you encode these states into say different energy levels, or sometimes different ground states. It really depends on the architecture. But the key thing is that the laser itself, by using a specific energy, it allows you to transition between these states.


So this can let you flip the bit, say, so to speak, or create a superposition of those states. So this is how I would say you would write into a qubit, for example.


[Anna Rose] (38:51 - 38:54)
Okay. Yeah. So what are your, you just said the few different things.


[Josh Yang] (38:54 - 39:42)
Oh, yeah. So I mean, yeah, what are the quantum gate operations? So you have, I guess, the knot, for instance, so that would just be flipping the bit, for example.


But with more complex states, you can have things like a CNOT gate, for instance, it could control not. So based on the state of one qubit, you decide whether or not to flip the state of another qubit. And that's really the key thing I would say for these quantum computers is that the difficulty is not just in manipulating a single atom, but really manipulating the states of multiple atoms together.


[Anna Rose] (39:43 - 39:47)
Wow. So that's the write. That's where you're actually acting.


What about the read?


[Josh Yang] (39:49 - 39:50)
Okay.


[Anna Rose] (39:50 - 39:57)
So you're trying to under, you're basically using a laser to understand something about it.


[Josh Yang] (39:57 - 39:57)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (39:57 - 40:02)
So are you waiting for the light to come back to you? Is it like you bounce something off it?


[Josh Yang] (40:03 - 40:57)
Yeah. So actually, that's, that's somewhat, somewhat a good way to say it. So for reading, again, there are many different methods, but one of them is probably say through fluorescence.


So this is the atom emitting light. So when you send light to an atom that is resonant with a specific transition, if the atom is in the correct state, it will absorb those photons and then spontaneously emit them. So you can collect these emitted photons with just a detector or camera cameras, maybe a good way to see it.


So if you see fluorescence, you can infer that it is in that state. But if it's not in that state, it won't emit the fluorescence. So that's how you can read out, for example, the state of a qubit.


[Anna Rose] (40:58 - 41:03)
So what I said was bounce off it, which is false, because it sounds like it's more like absorbed and then emits.


[Josh Yang] (41:03 - 41:07)
Yes. Yes. For an example, yeah, that would be one way.


[Anna Rose] (41:08 - 41:15)
The thing that captures it on the other side, I guess, is not a laser. It's something else, I assume, like a sensor of some kind that can...


[Josh Yang] (41:15 - 41:24)
It's often literally a camera. Yeah. It's just a camera.


Yeah. Like I'm holding up a GoPro right now, but like, yeah, like effectively not this, but pretty close to this.


[Anna Rose] (41:25 - 41:29)
And you're trying to see light come back at you or some wavelength come back at you.


[Josh Yang] (41:29 - 41:30)
Exactly. Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (41:31 - 41:31)
Cool.


[Josh Yang] (41:31 - 41:40)
You have to put some optics in the way and blah, blah, blah to make it all nice and make it actually comfortable by the camera. But for the most part, think of it as like a slightly fancier camera because it's pretty much what it is.


[Anna Rose] (41:40 - 41:59)
Okay. Dumb question on the quantum front, though. If you read, doesn't that sort of undermine the whole thing?


Like, isn't it sort of like the minute there's an observer, everything breaks? I think I'm totally butchering it, I realised. Oh, it's great.


Yeah. When do you use read function? When do you want to do that?


[Josh Yang] (42:00 - 44:30)
Okay. Well, I will say we are getting more and more out of my realm of expertise into the algorithm section. But from what I do know about quantum computing and, of course, the work that I have done or classes even that I've taken on this, you are right.


Reading is not good for superposition. It will collapse the state. I think a common point of confusion within the idea that, oh, observation destroys the state is, oh, it has to do with some conscious being observing it.


But that's not really the case. As I described how this reading works is we are shining light onto the atom. It has to emit it and then has to do that.


So that process itself is what is collapsing, say, the state. So within your quantum algorithm that you're running, reading can be used at different points, but it needs to be used when you are purposefully trying to collapse the superposition or state. If you're not trying to do that, it's obviously not a good idea.


So definitely say at the end of your algorithm in order to get the result, you do need to read it. But sometimes you can, within your quantum algorithm, there are points where you do want to read specific qubits, for instance, actually to collapse it. And then that is actually part of the algorithm as well.


Guillermo, I'm kind of looking to you here. I wonder if you have a bit more knowledge on some of these things, but this is my understanding, at least. I think the statement is, yeah, it's like, there's always this like, oh, there's a conscious observer that like needs to do it.


It's actually not at all. In general, it's like the problem is you need to interact with the system to be able to do anything with it. So this is a little bit more on the philosophy part than it is about the quantum computing part.


It's just in general, just like kind of clear the confusion. It's like, you know, when we look at a baseball, like a baseball, you can shine a light on it. Like light is totally fine because it doesn't move the baseball very much unless it's like a very strong, you know, initial light.


So like in our normal world, we think of it as like, okay, cool. Yeah. You like have a baseball, you can like look at it and then measure the velocity or whatever.


Right. The problem is like as a systems can very, very small, the act of shining a light on the system is itself changing the system. And there's no way like, like for you to like to read a system means that effectively you and that system have to like interact in some way.


And in doing that, you destroy the like original state of the system.


[Anna Rose] (44:31 - 44:33)
That's kind of which is all things at the same time.


[Josh Yang] (44:34 - 45:24)
Yeah, exactly. Right. Like to do that, you somehow need to like alter the system in a way that allows you to read it.


Right. And the act of reading itself, it like alters the system because there's a whole thing I was like effectively to read a system, you have to entangle yourself with a system, which means that you've destroyed the state of the system. But anyways, it's getting fancy.


The point here is like often you don't want to do that until a certain point, right? Because you want to preserve the entanglement of different qubits while you're doing some computation. So that's the beauty of quantum computing is that it allows you to kind of like preserve this entanglement.


But in doing so, you can't like actively read it until after you're done. It's not like a normal chip where I can like put a little voltage probe and check it at some point and then be like, OK, cool. Here's like what the transistor that 3529 says or something, you know.


So this is just like more philosophical than it is specifically about quantum computing, but just for fun for this audience.


[Anna Rose] (45:26 - 46:07)
OK, I want to talk more about bright light photonics because I actually want to hear the type of laser you're building. But I have one more question about what we just described. And this kind of relates to what you're doing, too, because like how many how many lasers, how many atoms, how many of these setups do you imagine in like a functional computer?


Even like give me a range, if you want, of the amount, because I just I kind of can't pick like right now in my idea of what we've just described, there's like five. But maybe I'm completely off. Maybe there's like hundreds or thousands or two or like I have no idea what the range is.


[Josh Yang] (46:07 - 47:05)
Yeah. So for the number of physical atoms or ions within these quantum computing systems, I think the definition of a useful quantum computer can kind of vary. But the the number of atoms that you need for a quantum computer to provide some sort of utility, you can honestly look at a lot of these companies, public facing roadmaps, and they range in the tens of thousands of physical qubits to millions of qubits.


OK, so that's a lot of lasers. That doesn't mean that that doesn't mean that you need one laser per qubit. Oftentimes what you will do is you'll have a high power laser and you will have some optical element that allows you to split the single laser into a lot of little lasers and then boom, you can work with a lot of atoms.


OK, but it does require still an enormous scale in terms of the laser side as well.


[Anna Rose] (47:05 - 47:32)
I thank you for answering that question because that gives me, I think, a little bit more insight into what your business will look like. Let's talk about bright light photonics and the type of lasers that you're building, because we started with like what the lasers have traditionally looked like and been and they're big and they need to be cooled. What about your lasers?


Are you building lasers for all of these functions? Are they for specific ones? Yeah.


Tell me a little bit about bright light photonics.


[Josh Yang] (47:33 - 49:52)
Yeah. So I was mentioning this when we started, I guess, chatting earlier about how my pathway through my Ph.D. to starting a company looked like, where I first started working with qubits, spin qubits, colour centres, and then worked on the miniaturisation of the laser side. Specifically, what we are doing at Brightlight is we are taking a laser called a tie sapphire laser, the same laser that I used in Jelena's lab doing these spin qubit experiments.


And this is a pretty large, bulky, expensive system. And we are making it something that is producible also on a chip as well. So significantly miniaturising it, whether it is in terms of size, but can also be in terms of cost.


Do you want to give an idea for how big and expensive and like annoying the boxes actually are? Just just for like context, just to give an image like a good image here. Oh, yeah.


Yeah. So so I'd say that the size of a typical tie sapphire laser system, they come in different shapes and sizes. Some are smaller than the other, but you could think of it as maybe a large microwave, for example, on a table.


And what our laser, the chip scale version is, is probably the size of the chip itself can be the size of a grain of rice is how small it can be. Whoa. So you can get really significant miniaturisation of the size of the system.


Now, when we're talking about cost, tie sapphire lasers often cost over $100,000 per laser. And because we are making many, many different chips simultaneously using the same processing that is used in making semiconductors. So you're making lots of dies, lots of devices on a single wafer.


The cost per die, the cost per laser can drop significantly, in theory, even to hundreds of dollars, tens of dollars if the volume supports it. Well, so that is the significant reduction in the laser size and costs that we are working on developing at Brightlight.


[Anna Rose] (49:52 - 49:57)
How many would you put on a chip? Or is that the chip itself?


[Josh Yang] (49:58 - 50:05)
Oh, sorry. The chip itself is about the size of a grain of rice, for instance. So for instance, it can be a millimetre by a millimetre.


[Anna Rose] (50:06 - 50:08)
Okay. So how big is the laser?


[Josh Yang] (50:09 - 50:24)
So the laser itself, I mean, the laser is the chip. Okay. Yeah.


Specifically, like when Josh says chip, it's not like quantum chip. This is like the chip that is used as the, like the laser is the chip, right?


[Guillermo Angeris] (50:24 - 50:24)
Okay.


[Josh Yang] (50:24 - 50:32)
This is like, like think of, it's like a different component of the system. And when Josh says chip, it's like that is its own component, which is the laser itself.


[Anna Rose] (50:33 - 50:39)
Okay. Where does it live? Where do you put it on or in or, yeah.


And how many go into that thing?


[Josh Yang] (50:40 - 50:56)
Yeah, Josh, just for fun, for the audience, you should like send a picture to Anna who will hopefully relay it to the audience of like what the chip itself and then what the like surrounding stuff around the chip looks like in the size. Yes. I'll add it to the show notes.


Just to make it really clear.


[Anna Rose] (50:57 - 51:00)
So what is the stuff around it? What does it go on?


[Josh Yang] (51:00 - 52:35)
So the, as Guillermo was saying, the laser is the chip, so to say. So everything that is on the chip is everything that's needed for the laser functionality. So say being able to say slightly tune the laser or do whatever functions you need on the laser.


But, and this was a not necessarily a misconception, but even within the academic space, I would say, is that even if you can produce a really nice chip, that doesn't end up being very useful for the customer itself. Because if I give a scientist a laser chip in order for them to actually use it, they need to set up all the different functionalities to power it or extract the light. So what we also do at Brightlight is we package the chip.


That means we are providing it with the electrical and optical IO. So how do we get the power to the chip? How do we get the light off the chip?


And the result is a system that is bigger, of course, not by that much. It's probably still on the size of maybe, I'd say, like a few centimetres at most compared to this massive tabletop system. But then when you have that module, that is something that is more plug and play.


You can just take a fibre and then plug it into your existing system. But at the heart of it, what actually makes the light, what controls the light, all of that is done on a chip that is incredibly tiny.


[Anna Rose] (52:35 - 52:42)
How do you do that, though? And is it as powerful? Like, is there a power loss by making it so tiny?


[Josh Yang] (52:42 - 53:37)
So definitely there are power constraints that you have when putting it on a chip, especially because the way we have it on a chip is by using these waveguides, which are tiny optical fibres. The light is in a very small amount of space. The volume, the mode volume of it is really tiny.


And that means the intensity is incredibly high. So as you push powers higher and higher, you can see more thermal effects, even potentially damage to your chip itself. One of the nice things, though, is that we're not talking about small amounts of power that will damage the chip.


You do really need to bring it to significant amounts of powers. But realistically, there are limitations when you're working with chip-scale lasers compared to lasers that operate in free space, where you don't have it confined to a very tiny space.


[Anna Rose] (53:38 - 53:51)
These lasers, can they be used for all of the functionality that we just described? Like, all the different... Can it write?


Can it read? Or is it only usable for one of these, or maybe not even any in the neutral atoms case?


[Josh Yang] (53:52 - 55:22)
So it's a really good question. And it's precisely what I was talking about earlier when I was mentioning that quantum computing, especially atom-based quantum computing that relies on lasers, faces a really difficult challenge in industry because you need all these different functionalities, and they all have different wavelengths, oftentimes colours of light are necessary. They not only need different colours, they need different powers.


They need different noise or stability, purity levels, let's say, for the colour itself. All these different requirements together are very difficult today to manufacture in a cohesive and unified way. The beauty of TIE Sapphire, and this is why we are focussing on commercialising this chip-scale Sapphire laser, is that the inherent properties of the material actually give it the ability to produce an incredibly wide range of colours.


That means for most, I'm not going to say every, but the huge vast majority of colours, powers, noise levels of lasers that you need in these systems, they can all be done with our material, our platform. So that is really the strength that we are trying to bring to the industry, having a single platform that is able to tackle all these different tasks that are necessary within the different quantum computing architectures.


[Anna Rose] (55:23 - 55:39)
How, I mean, that sounds amazing, but how were you able to shrink it so much? Because I thought you were going to say something like a big microwave to a shoebox, but you're like skipping a bunch of steps here. Or has other miniaturisation come before you?


[Josh Yang] (55:40 - 57:26)
Not really, right? Yeah. Well, credit where credit is due, TIE Sapphire lasers have been a very key part, because of their properties, their excellent properties that I mentioned, have played a very key part in quantum optics.


I think a nickname that it has sometimes, it depends who you ask, but it is often called the workhorse of quantum optics, because of how useful it is. And a lot of people, including myself, have also seen the pain of using these systems. So as a result, there also has been a lot of work in history to try to miniaturise this laser.


So what does it look like in its bulk system? Essentially, you have a crystal of TIE Sapphire, and you have all these complicated mirror setups needed to control and produce whatever colour of light or different operations that you need with the laser. The way that we are able to miniaturise it is instead of using a crystal and having mirror setup that need to be mechanically tuned, we make integrated waveguides.


So these miniature optical fibres, which have been used in silicon photonics, for instance, but we make the waveguides itself, not out of silicon, we make them out of TIE Sapphire, that specific material that you would have this special cube out of. So that is how we're able to leverage the properties of this crystal while still having it in a chip scale format. So as a result, you don't need any free space mirrors, you don't need any moving parts at all.


And now you have something that can be manufactured at the scale of thousands at a time. That's essentially what we're building at Brightlight.


[Anna Rose] (57:27 - 57:58)
Is it using any sort of lithography in that material? I'm now picturing you sort of, there's this mechanical system that was the original version, but you have these kind of like mirrors and these things around the material. Here you're like going inside the material and kind of creating pathways for the light, I'm guessing.


How are you doing that? Is it using something like chiselling into a material to get that?


[Josh Yang] (57:59 - 58:46)
I actually think it's pretty close, but maybe not. I don't know, Josh. Yeah.


So there are a few steps to how we get it to this process. So maybe let's take a step back. And how does silicon photonics work?


So silicon photonics works when you have a very thin, hundreds of nanometre thickness, a sheet, I guess, of silicon on some sort of substrate. And then with lithography, you're able to pattern that sheet and basically carve out, etch out pieces that you don't want. So as a result, you get something that is hundreds of nanometres thick and using lithography, you can make it hundreds of nanometres wide.


And that allows you to create these wave guides and all these spirals, all these different devices on a chip.


[Anna Rose] (58:47 - 58:47)
Interesting.


[Josh Yang] (58:47 - 59:51)
So for Ti-Sapphire, it starts as this block of material. What we do is we do a subtractive process because the first thing you need is you need that thin sheet. We call it a thin film.


You need that sheet of material. So you take Sapphire, you bond it to some handle substrate that you're working with, and you actually remove the Sapphire until you're left with that small amount of material. Then once you have that, everything you do is just like what you do with silicon photonics.


Use photolithography to pattern some sort of structure on it. And then using a plasma etch, you transfer this pattern directly into the Sapphire itself. And that allows you to have all these different structures, all these different wave guides made out of Ti-Sapphire itself.


So what we don't do is we don't start with just a bulk block of Ti-Sapphire and then make wave guides in it. We translate it into the exact same form factor and processing that is used for silicon photonics and then make wave guides out of Ti-Sapphire itself.


[Anna Rose] (59:52 - 1:00:02)
Actually, at first I thought, are you copying what the larger devices do in this form? Or are you actually, you have to sort of think about it quite differently because of the scale.


[Josh Yang] (1:00:02 - 1:00:09)
It's doing the same function, but it's doing it differently is the best answer for it.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:09 - 1:00:12)
And using more of the silicon-based as inspiration, I guess.


[Josh Yang] (1:00:13 - 1:01:33)
Yes, exactly. Using, generally speaking, the field of integrated photonics and existing device architectures as well. So what are we trying to do on ship that is, say, done in free space?


So something that I mentioned earlier is that a laser needs a cavity. It needs a space where light can basically travel in a loop, so to speak. The easiest way to do it in free space is you have two mirrors that are facing each other.


So light will just bounce back and forth. But when you're working with wave guides, for instance, one thing you can do instead is not having two mirrors, but having a loop of light. So you have a wave guide that forms a loop.


You can think of it just as a small racetrack, honestly. And if light is in that loop, it can just continue to circle around. So there are different techniques that you can use in integrated photonics to replicate or even expand on the functionalities that you would be able to do in free space optics.


Wow. I was going to say, the picture you should have in your head is instead of having a cube with two mirrors, you can take the cube and extend it out and then wrap it around, literally like a little rope, right? And then, yeah, of course, the light is now travelling through that material a shit-tonne more than it would be if you just had a cube and you were just reflecting off the ends, right?


[Anna Rose] (1:01:33 - 1:01:51)
The other lasers, from what I understood, you have these mirrors that you could probably change. In your case, it seems very fixed if you're carving it out. So do you have to create different kinds of lasers that then, you know, they only really do one thing at a time?


[Josh Yang] (1:01:51 - 1:01:56)
So you can also do tuning on a chip itself.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:56 - 1:01:56)
Yeah.


[Josh Yang] (1:01:57 - 1:03:09)
And that's the exciting thing because when you're working with, as you mentioned, there are no moving parts anymore. So then the question is like, how do you change the laser cavity? How do you tune the device?


There are actually many different ways that people do this. One is through actual heaters, for instance. Many materials, actually, basically all materials have something that's called the, have different thermo-optic indices.


So basically the material itself, how fast light travels in it does have some slight dependence on the temperature of the material. So if I put a heater on it and heat up the material, then that allows me to make it longer because light will move slower or something like that. So that actually allows us to tune it.


There's also other properties such as electro-optic effects or piezo-optic effects, all these different ways you can tune the material itself. So even though the material is not moving, it's staying in place, you can still change the properties so that your laser is able to tune as well.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:10 - 1:03:24)
Crazy. So I almost picture like you're heating this material to make a certain frequency that you then use to cool an atom. Although I guess it wouldn't be across the room anymore, but yeah, that's crazy.


[Josh Yang] (1:03:25 - 1:03:25)
Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:26 - 1:03:34)
How far can you, like, you know, you talk about the size of this being so small. Are these lasers also just like only travelling a very short distance?


[Josh Yang] (1:03:35 - 1:03:41)
So the lasers can travel as much distance as you would like them to in theory.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:42 - 1:03:42)
Yeah.


[Josh Yang] (1:03:42 - 1:04:22)
Once they exit out of the device, it is really up to the architecture as for where you want them to land. Generally speaking, if there's no need, you probably don't want them travelling further because generally speaking, it requires more control, I guess, in that case. But it just depends on how the system is set up.


For instance, in a lot of these quantum systems, the laser does produce heat. And heat, as we talked about when discussing cooling of the atoms, is something that you don't want. So depending on the architecture, you might have a little bit of separation from the lasers and the actual atoms itself.


[Anna Rose] (1:04:23 - 1:04:30)
Is this laser beam going into the air or is it used in a substrate?


[Josh Yang] (1:04:31 - 1:09:12)
So that's really dependent on the architecture of the quantum computer itself. So for most atom-based quantum computing systems today, it is free space. It's not in air, it's in vacuum.


This is just because, as we mentioned, you don't want any dust bunnies in your quantum computing system. But many times it is free space, although there is a lot of work to develop systems where you don't need these large vacuum chambers where you can have now qubits, say, on a chip as well. And then in that case, you probably want your laser going directly into the chip instead of travelling in free space anymore.


So cool. What's cool is I think some of this that you did was you started the PhD with actually working on things that were pretty quantum computing, obviously also many sensing applications adjacent. And then you realised that actually very quickly the problem wasn't...


I mean, there's obviously a lot of difficulties to work out in that platform, but the problem is actually upstream of that, which is how the hell do you get the lasers? And so I guess what was your process of starting Brightlight? You have co-founders and one shot a little bit about how you guys met.


And then additionally, I think this is cool, but do you want to describe a little bit about what the operation actually looks like? I know you're building a lot of stuff in-house and you're just reverse engineering all sorts of interesting tools and stuff. So it might be fun to discuss a little bit and a little bit about the history of Brightlight specifically, I think might be a good one.


Yeah. So maybe starting from the PhD, I definitely didn't come into Stanford thinking, oh, I want to start a company based out of my research. I don't think I was opposed to it, but it's not something that I consciously went in with.


However, it was after we had miniaturised this large tie sapphire laser and actually used it directly in one of our experiments that I had done at the start of my PhD. So effectively replacing this hundred thousand dollar laser system with this chip scale device that we made. That was the point that I realised that, wow, there is something immediately practically relevant about this research, something that I myself wish I had and tackles a lot of these industry problems.


And that honestly pushed me to commercialise this company. So my co-founders are Daniil and Alex. Daniil was my mentor in that lab at Stanford when I had joined.


He was a third year PhD student when I was a first year PhD student. So we had worked a tonne over the years and we had also worked together on the on-chip tie sapphire laser. And then Alex, I had met him at an APS March meeting.


So this is a physical society. American physical society. This was actually one of the first conferences that I went to after COVID restrictions had sort of been lifting up.


So that's where I met Alex first. And actually, Daniil and Alex have known each other for quite some time because they were in the same house at Caltech as well. And then we decided, hey, let's start up this company.


And that's how we founded Brightlight. Yeah, Guillermo, you mentioned there's a lot of things behind the scenes in terms of setting up a laboratory and doing all the work that needs to be done to get this out to the market. And one of the things that is, I would say, is pretty impressive for Brightlight is because we are building a new laser platform, there's not a lot that exists for what we need to do.


So even as a startup, I like to say that we are unfortunately very vertically integrated. That means we are involved from the processing of the material. How do we even get the material that we need to fabricate these devices out of?


Then before that, in terms of the design and simulation, that is also what we need to do. And then when we go into the clean room, after we make the device, how do we then check that the device works well? Because, okay, we've produced this chip.


How do we know that this chip is going to have the powers that we expect, have the colours that we expect? We need to build the laboratory, the optical experiments, and setups needed to test it. And then finally, after we verify that this chip is great, how do we let it be something that's usable by our customers?


We need to package it. We need to do the electrical optical IO. We need the thermal interfaces.


We build all that equipment actually in-house as well.


[Anna Rose] (1:09:13 - 1:09:21)
Does anything like that exist in the market? You can't model it. You have to build everything bespoke to this system, I guess, right?


[Josh Yang] (1:09:22 - 1:10:19)
So, there are a lot of tools that we could actually maybe buy from existing systems, but these are really expensive tools. Very expensive. Something that takes a lot of capital, I would say, to acquire in-house.


But it is something that we still want to have the capability in-house so we can do rapid prototyping and iteration. So, one thing that I'm really proud of for my team is they are incredibly hands-on. And basically what we've done is we've taken different parts of all these subsystems that are needed and basically home-built custom equipment ourselves that can do not only the functionalities that the tools that you might be able to purchase do, but actually have a lot more flexibility to target what our needs are.


So, when we showed Guillermo around our lab, I think...


[Guillermo Angeris] (1:10:19 - 1:10:20)
That was awesome.


[Josh Yang] (1:10:20 - 1:11:03)
Were you impressed? It was awesome. It was great to show him all these different tooling and kinds of equipment that we had cobbled together from different things.


I mean, it's awesome stuff. It's quite inspiring because you know, I think at some point I was chatting with Daniil and he was like, yeah, you know, we bought this thing from a random used surplus sale that wasn't working, but I plugged in Codex via RS-232, which is an old-school serial port, and just asked it to go reverse-engineer the protocol it uses. I was like, oh, this is amazing.


This is perfect. And then they jerry-rigged it to do something that it wasn't really meant to do. It's amazing.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:04 - 1:11:26)
This is incredible. There's an incredible amount of expertise needed here. I wonder, Josh, do you think in a way this company can only exist at this time because of exactly that kind of thing?


Because you can all of a sudden gain this expertise? Or did you feel like your studies actually prepared you to be doing every part of this supply chain?


[Josh Yang] (1:11:27 - 1:12:41)
Do your studies ever prepare you? Like, I don't know. Yeah, because the frank answer to that is my skill set was definitely not sufficient.


Daniil and Alex had quite a bit of machine shop and tinkering experience, which is really nice because oh, we need this specific part. We could buy it for a lot and wait four weeks for it to come in, or we go to the machine shop and CNC it ourselves. Having Alex and Daniil just be able to have that skills is really useful.


But what I will say is something that has been really critical is, as Guillermo was saying, working with a lot of these old pieces of equipment where you have these really long manuals, and it's really difficult to figure out how to even interface with these different machines. Having tools like Codex, for instance, lets us be able to take all these different pieces of equipment and actually utilise them well together. It is undoubtedly an incredible time saver and allows us to be able to take refurbished or used parts that are older than us, maybe, in some case, and utilise them in our experiments and equipment.


[Anna Rose] (1:12:42 - 1:12:54)
So what's next for Brightlight? What stage are you actually at? It sounds like you have these things built to some degree, but have they been tested?


Are you ready to ship them? Where are you at?


[Josh Yang] (1:12:54 - 1:13:37)
Yeah, so we are actually shipping out evaluation units of our lasers to customers and partners later this year. So these are packaged prototypes, which are essentially what I mentioned earlier, plug and play modules that can go directly into customer systems for testing and evaluation. Now, of course, there is definitely still a ways to go before they have, say, the reliability or scale that is what we are targeting and aiming for.


But this is something that is real. This is something that we are putting out on the market, and we're really excited to have it in customers' hands.


[Anna Rose] (1:13:38 - 1:13:41)
So cool. Who are your customers? Who uses them at this point?


[Josh Yang] (1:13:41 - 1:14:30)
So definitely within R&D, science, academia, all these researchers definitely need these lasers. The biggest focus that we have, though, goes beyond that. It goes into these companies, these integrators, people who are building these quantum systems.


So whether it is quantum computers, whether it is quantum networks, whether it is quantum sensing devices. On the other hand, we are also working to collaborate and partner with existing laser manufacturers because the pain of having to build all these different lasers is not something that just the end customer feels. It is also the laser manufacturer who is trying to build these boxes to sell to these companies.


So that is the different customer segments that we are focussing on in the term.


[Anna Rose] (1:14:31 - 1:14:58)
Cool. This sounds incredibly ambitious and cool. Josh, thank you so much for coming on the show and sharing with us not only the story of Brightlight Photonics and the work you're doing, but also just thank you for letting me ask dumb questions about lasers.


Thank you so much for explaining some of the components of some of these quantum systems in a little more detail than I think we had before. Yeah, I really appreciate that.


[Josh Yang] (1:14:58 - 1:15:12)
Of course. It was my pleasure. Thanks for having me on.


Thank you, Josh. I always have a lot of fun chatting. And it's funny chatting on air now, you know, because like we normally just chat about random stuff, not on air.


But, you know, it's great. Great to also like let other people join into the to the party.


[Anna Rose] (1:15:12 - 1:15:19)
All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Henrik, Rachel and Tanya, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.