Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week I dive back into the story of Zero Knowledge Systems with my guest Jonathan Wilkins. Jonathan was an employee of Zero Knowledge Systems back in the year 2000. He went on after this to be a founding member of Blockstream, a company that funded Bitcoin core development from 2014 onwards. I mentioned speaking to Jonathan in my episode "Back to the Future with Zero Knowledge", which came out a few weeks ago. In that I shared my very coincidental connection to the Zero Knowledge Systems company, and what that may have to do with this show. I definitely recommend listening to that one before you jump into this one. It's only 15 minutes. I'll add the link in the show notes.


In this episode, I chat with Jonathan about the emergence of security culture in the 1990s, what Zero Knowledge Systems was building at the time he worked there, that is the Freedom Network. We talk a bit about the office and setup as well as the people who worked in the research lab and what they went on to do after. Jonathan shares a bit more about what he has done since discovering Bitcoin, joining Blockstream right at the start, and he also shares why for him, Bitcoin remains a uniquely secure digital asset. I want to thank him again for taking the time to go back in time, 25 years to explore this all with me.


As I stated in my last episode on Zero Knowledge Systems, I am on a side quest this year to learn more about this company, a company which brought together amazing technologists working on P2P and privacy tech. Because honestly, the concepts and experiments which came out of this research lab still resonate in our ZK community today. We are working on programming some additional interviews around this, so do stay tuned and let me know if you like it.


Now, before we kick off, I do want to just let you know about the zkSummit. zkSummit13 is coming up. It's happening on May 12th in Toronto. This is the second time we bring the zkSummit to North America, the first being all the way back in 2019 when we did one in San Francisco. If you've never been to a zkSummit, I definitely recommend checking it out. This is the spot to find out about the latest research, the newest applications, to find out who are the most important players in ZK today. It's also a wonderful way to get to know the larger ZK community.


The application to attend is now open. If you'd like to apply to speak, you can do so in the same form. The speaker application deadline is March 15th. Generally, I recommend applying early. We do expect this event to sell out and tickets are limited. Speaker slots are even more limited. So do get your application in early and we'll get in touch with you very shortly. Links, as always, are in the show notes and I hope to see you there.


Now here is my interview with Jonathan Wilkins.


Today, I'm here with Jonathan Wilkins. I mentioned Jonathan in my episode "Back to the Future with Zero Knowledge" a few weeks ago. I had spoken to him in prep to be able to tell that brief story about Zero Knowledge Systems. But I'm so excited to have you on the show, Jonathan. Welcome.


Jonathan Wilkins [03:30] Thanks for having me.


Anna Rose [03:31] I'm really hoping through this, we get to dig a little deeper into that project. But I also want to hear about you and your story, how you got involved in that company and what you've done since. So let's start this off with a little bit of background. What were you doing before joining Zero Knowledge Systems? What kind of like led you there?


Jonathan Wilkins [03:49] I'd taken a little bit of time off after I had done a startup. I was working for a company called Secure Networks. It was based in Calgary and we built a tool called Ballista, which was one of the first vulnerability scanners. So it's a tool that would go on -- you'd run it on your laptop or whatever and it would go out, find all the hosts on a network, and then it would proceed to try and break into them.


The other -- the only other tool in the market was ISS, Internet Scanner. It was less aggressive than we were -- it would just grab banners and would see if it knew anything about that kind of version of the software. Ours was a little bit more comprehensive and a little bit more of an attack tool. It would send a large buffer, if it was a buffer overflow and see if the service stopped responding, for instance.


And it was a small team led by a gentleman named Alfred Huger, who is one of the people I respect most in the industry. He had this vision for the product and it had done pretty well for a small team, a couple hundred thousand dollars in investment. It had a 25 million dollar exit, I think, about a year and a half after that. And so that was my first real computer security job. I'd been doing a lot of just hacking prior.


When I was in high school, I was going up to the university and breaking into computer labs to get access to the Internet that way. Because that was circa '93, '94, '95. And at that time there was no way to commercially buy access. So that was what you did.


Anna Rose [05:24] Why were you excited about this? What was it -- it sounds like computers, security, Internet. How did this come to you and why were you excited about it?


Jonathan Wilkins [05:33] Oh, it was just something that I just was drawn to. I don't know what exactly it was. Probably, a little bit of exposure to some of the sci-fi that I was rooted to at the time. Like all the William Gibson stuff like that.


I remember though, not thinking it was a career path back in high school. It was just something I did for fun. And it was before there really was much of an industry. You know, you didn't have much in the way of computer security jobs. It was basically like you had a network admin, and they had to do a little bit of security things. But I think it was, circa, the first couple commercial firewalls even. So it was before that was even a really a thing.


No one really had Internet access unless you were an institution or, you were Xerox PARC or something like that. So IBM. The people I met who were also hackers were all very interesting, and it was just sort of like a niche thing that people were excited about.


Anna Rose [06:28] Just the thought about this, like back then when you would hack, I feel like you were dealing with sort of the core computer elements in it. Like it feels like you were closer to the bare metal or something.


Jonathan Wilkins [06:41] Oh yeah. Not much.


Anna Rose [06:43] Because there, if there's no security, there's no -- none of the protections that we now think of with computer systems. You're not going around things. You're kind of just like walking into them.


Jonathan Wilkins [06:54] You were finding things was the big challenge. Like a lot of people I knew from the time and I caught just sort of the end part of this pause, hacking X.25 networks. So a lot of the people we wound up hiring as contractors were people that Al had met on some of these X.25 networks from Argentina.


You know, they had met on a system where they both realized they'd broken into the same place, and there was someone else on it. It was a basic talk interface or something like that. Or one of the first machines I got access to at the University of Saskatchewan was, it was a fax box called Skycat. There's Skycat, Skyfox and a couple of other ones. And the person who gave me access told me, LS and MAN and that was it. So I could get a directory listing and then I could find the manual pages for whatever I saw there. That was enough to get going. Not a lot of hand holding, but I was curious enough and stubborn enough, and frankly, it was Saskatchewan. The winters there are pretty vicious and so you -- there's not a lot else to do. You know, you don't have mountains nearby. It's -50 and it's flat.


Anna Rose [08:07] Wow. Okay. So boredom and a curiosity about computers got you there, sounds like?


Jonathan Wilkins [08:13] Yeah, pretty much. That's what it was. And this pattern is repeated. I've met more than a few people who are quite good hackers and have had a similar experience. Spent some time in Minnesota or something for a period of time, if I recall correctly. So there's a winter in a cold place does seem to figure in more than a few hacker histories.


Anna Rose [08:35] Histories. Okay. So that led you then to work on a startup. I mean, I just think it's kind of cool to imagine a tech company in Calgary in the 90s because I just -- was there a tech scene in the 90s?


Jonathan Wilkins [08:48] Not really. I happened to have moved there, and a friend of mine had gone to a 2600 meetup. And he'd met a gentleman by the name of [?] Bruce Lytle, who knew Al and made the intro when he heard that I knew something about Windows, because I had basically enough UNIX experience to get into things. And I had also got enough Windows programming experience from just generally fucking around with Delphi and C++ Builder and some other things like that to be able to create a UI stuff and so forth on Windows.


So that combination was enough to qualify me for a role there. And it was just basically like word-of-mouth and I, you know, sent some -- I showed him my denial-of-service tool that I'd written for Windows that exploited some issue with the TCP stack that killed it back in the day. So it was -- that was all the proof they needed for me to get hired because there weren't a lot of people who had that combination of skills and the project was way beyond what I thought I could possibly do. But I was so excited about being like a security job. Not just like a sysadmin or something.


Anna Rose [09:58] Yeah.


Jonathan Wilkins [09:59] That I was like, I'll figure it out. And I did.


Anna Rose [10:03] Cool. That's awesome. When did that company get sold?


Jonathan Wilkins [10:06] It sold in '98 to Network Associates, what had been McAfee and so forth, and spent a little bit of time down in Mountain View. Yeah. And everyone else stayed on. I did my few months that they were asking of me, and then I just went back home, took some time off.


Anna Rose [10:24] Nice. Did you do anything else before going to Zero Knowledge Systems or was that sort of your next step?


Jonathan Wilkins [10:29] I basically spent some time -- I started a record label.


Anna Rose [10:35]Oh.


Jonathan Wilkins [10:35] MadScience Records and released some music some friends of mine had been working on. I got to sort of shepherd that through the whole process which was a lot of fun. Enjoyed the electronic music scene at the time, and quite a lot. And did a bunch of snowboarding. And that was exactly what I needed at the time because I was pretty burnt out from the startup.


But a friend of mine had seen an article about the whole Zero Knowledge Systems, I think it being a something in Wired or something like that maybe. He pointed me there. I sent my resume in, not really think I would necessarily hear back. But at that time there weren't that many people doing security or privacy anywhere, much less here's another company in Canada. So I got a call, went out, did an interview and it was for some sort of lower level programming job. Halfway through my first interview, they pulled someone else in, and I wound up interviewing instead for the research group.


Anna Rose [11:37] Oh, nice.


Jonathan Wilkins [11:38] And had the title of Adversary at Zero Knowledge when I was hired.


Anna Rose [11:42] Cool.


Jonathan Wilkins [11:43] Which was possibly the coolest job title I'd ever heard at that point.


Anna Rose [11:47] Adversary.


Jonathan Wilkins [11:47] So quite enjoyed.


Anna Rose [11:49] It sounds like the culture in there was kind of perfect for that time and sort of like the type of people they wanted to attract too. Did you know the name Zero Knowledge for Zero Knowledge Systems? Like were you at all familiar at the time with what that meant or what it stood for?


Jonathan Wilkins [12:06] I wouldn't say that I'd ever studied that kind of branch of cryptography or anything like that. I knew what kind of it was from reading through probably all the applied cryptography. I'm pretty sure 1 and 2 were out by then. But certainly 1 was out by then. And there was the Handbook of Applied Cryptography as well, which might have covered it a little bit, but it wasn't something I'd ever written code for or anything like that. I knew roughly what it was. Basic sort of example of it.


Anna Rose [12:36] Do you think back then though -- like you were coming more from security and sort of as a hacker, more, I guess, on the engineering front. Zero Knowledge back then, like I don't know if there were like very many implementations of that anyways. So it may have -- I mean, you tell me, but was it more in the realm of weird math or was it actually like being used in anything for real?


Jonathan Wilkins [12:59] Anything that was being used in the company at the time, not so much, but it was certainly something like a protocol element that people in the company would happily use if it was applicable. We had some more than a handful of first rate cryptographers. Like the research group was stacked with talent. We had Ian Goldberg, we had Adam Back. There were another handful of Ph.D. cryptographers. There was no shortage of people. Adam Shostack was there. They'd managed to bring together a really great solid group of people.


And so there wasn't really much that was beyond them as far as protocol design, and that was also a group of people who was more than capable of doing the analysis and attacking it. And so, there were a bunch of other like little side projects that got built as well. Like there was an e-cash system called [?] Zorkmids that was essentially a Chaumian bank. There was so much talent that they basically had more bandwidth than was required for what was being built with the Freedom Network, especially given that it was hard to make big changes once it was being deployed and was actually being run as a live service.


So they were trying to use some of that talent to do some consulting work for businesses. They had licensed the brand's credential stuff, and other things like that were trying to get people to start using those things.


Anna Rose [14:31] You mentioned you had this amazing group of researchers around you. I'm just curious if any of them went on to do things we might know.


Jonathan Wilkins [14:39] I mean, Ian Goldberg, of course, his PhD thesis was essentially the Freedom Network, and interactive privacy systems. Oh, actually, Vitalik was a research assistant of Ian's at one point.


Anna Rose [14:55] Yeah. I think I've had one of his PhD students on the show. I've never actually interviewed him here though, but yeah, it would be fun to do that.


Jonathan Wilkins [15:02] Ian also invented the Sphinx mix format, which is. -- or a co-author on the paper. And that is used in Bitcoin's Lightning Network. When I saw that come out when I was at Blockstream, I encouraged Rusty to adopt that at the time. And it's been -- Lightning would not be as good without it. Ian has been influential in many, many ways. I shared an office with him when I was at Zero Knowledge and learned a lot from that man.


Anna Rose [15:33] Cool.


Jonathan Wilkins [15:34] And I'm eternally grateful for that time. The number of people who then went on to cryptocurrency from just that group. You know, we had Adam, we had Austin. Austin was the original CEO at Blockstream, and he and Adam were sort of the impetus for that company to form, and were able to get everything off the ground with that initial $21 million raise that Austin managed to pull off with just a whiteboard, essentially.


Anna Rose [16:02] Wow. It's a good number.


Jonathan Wilkins [16:04] Yep, yep. Exactly. That was intentional.


Anna Rose [16:07] Nice.


Jonathan Wilkins [16:08] I think they hit like 15, and he's like, let's go for 21.


Anna Rose [16:12] Let's go for 21. Nice. Do you remember anyone else?


Jonathan Wilkins [16:16] Other people who were at Zero Knowledge on that research team? Adam Shostack, who later went on to do a lot of stuff at Microsoft and so forth, especially in the threat modeling area. Ulf Moller wasn't -- I can't remember if he's on the research group or if he was just a cryptography engineer. I believe the latter. But he was also very involved in writing OpenSSL. And Mike Shaver was over at Netscape at the time that, if I recall correctly that we hired him. He was doing open source for them. Came over to Zero Knowledge to get our code out there for Freedom to be also fully open source and help spearhead that effort.


Who else was there? I mean, obviously Adam Back and his contributions to the biggest Bitcoin space are Legion. It's worth going through and reading some of the old Bitcoin Talk archives. There's a lot of stuff there in some of the theory and so forth areas that you'll see a thread with him and Greg Maxwell going back and forth on something, or him and Peter. And there's a lot to learn and there's some really cool stuff there.


Anna Rose [17:34] So let's talk about Freedom. When we chatted last, you mentioned that Freedom had been built on the same work that led to Tor.


Jonathan Wilkins [17:41] Yeah.


Anna Rose [17:42] Not that Freedom evolved into Tor, but that they had the same root. So what drew you to work there? Was it Freedom or was it the company in general?


Jonathan Wilkins [17:53] It was the idea of working on a system like that, like something that would enable anonymity on the Internet. Even back then, people knew that certain things were going to be an issue. It was essentially a great idea, just too early. The Tor Network was influenced by things like Mixmaster, which is a remailer system, had similar sort of characteristics, but it was a non-interactive system, so you didn't have to have real-time traffic. So the idea of applying that kind of thing to an interactive network was obvious, but Tor was definitely influenced by the work that was done on Freedom.


The structures are pretty much the same. When we were putting together the Freedom Network as a commercial endeavor, the idea was to pay the node operators so that you had reliable high bandwidth connections and so forth. And Tor obviously was just anyone who had the code could run it. And that led to a lot of issues over the course of time.


Some of the bigger problems with Tor was it was never really meant to be used against any real powerful adversary. It was only ever intended to be protection against your ISP seeing what you're doing, not necessarily someone with more view of the network. Like when the Snowden revelations came out, we found out that they'd been able to de-anonymize at least a certain set of users even back in, I think, if I recall correctly, the note dating from like 2009 or something that was found in the archives that came out in 2014, was it?


And so it was known that if you had a view of the full network, you could or enough routers in the way of the communication path, you could easily see who was communicating with who on just timing issues. You didn't have to even do anything more than that. You know, compare it to a Second World War kind of courier network using motorcycles. If you have a satellite network watching the area, it doesn't matter how many stops the courier network makes on the way. We know where they start and where they're landing messages.


You see the message go from one place to the other. You don't necessarily know what it is from just that, but that's often enough to tell you what you need to know. So that's essentially what Tor is. It does only that. It takes your messages, passes it through several hops and it comes out the other side.


Anna Rose [20:29] But Freedom, was freedom different then?


Jonathan Wilkins [20:32] Freedom actually had a few things at least that were better protection. So there was cover traffic. So a whole bunch of extra packets were getting sent around that were extraneous. So you had to follow a lot more of these superfluous messages in order to see the real messages that were intermixed among them. So it was more secure in that sense. It wasn't a full mixed network like some of the more modern designs for this kind of system, but it was a lot more secure than what Tor wound up being. The cost to run that cover traffic though, didn't come for free. It was definitely an extra cost that was born essentially by Zero Knowledge from venture capital.


Anna Rose [21:11] But what does that mean? Like the servers? Like there was a heavy computational load, like -- ?


Jonathan Wilkins [21:16] Oh, just network bandwidth. Bandwidth back then cost a lot more than it does now.


Anna Rose [21:21] Oh, okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [21:22] So in 2000, if you were doing a few extra gigabytes of traffic a day in cover traffic, it added up very quickly.


Anna Rose [21:30] Wow. Crazy.


Jonathan Wilkins [21:32] Yeah.


Anna Rose [21:32] It sounds very ambitious and sort of as you described it, maybe ahead of its time. When you joined, how much of it was built?


Jonathan Wilkins [21:41] It was live when I joined, so it hadn't been running for that long. I think it might have gone live maybe between the time I interviewed and the time I joined. But it had been live for some period of time. But a lot of the attacking the network hadn't been done. It hadn't been audited properly, it hadn't been really beat up in any significant way. So the people running the security for that came out of the internal group doing desktop support for CN Rail.


Anna Rose [22:16] Oh, CN Rail, like the Canadian National Rail. Okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [22:20] Yeah. Canadian National Rail. So they did the desktop support for the internal people there. And that was the background. And that wasn't really the same kind of background you'd want to run and you know, publicly-facing privacy-focused and security-critical kind of resource at the time. So, we butted heads a little bit. They insisted that I not analyze these things, but obviously that was my entire job.


Anna Rose [22:47] Yeah. Wait, what was your title again?


Jonathan Wilkins [22:49] Adversary.


Anna Rose [22:49] Adversary. Like you were brought on to break it, it sounds like.


Jonathan Wilkins [22:53] Yeah, exactly. That was the whole point of me being there was to do things like that. There was a little bit of politicking that was involved. I made friends with the people who were actually doing the work under them and found a bunch of bugs. We fixed them on the sly and then officially got permission to do the work. Did things out of order, but it was important.


Anna Rose [23:14] Wow.


Jonathan Wilkins [23:15] And, of course, they had no idea what was going on. So that demonstrated, again, how out of touch, out of the loop they were. Because the people who were running the systems knew exactly why this was important. They had no debate about it. And we basically had to conspire to get the work done as fast as possible and properly.


Anna Rose [23:35] Were these guys -- sorry, I missed it, but were these out external or were they in the company, the CN Rail folks?


Jonathan Wilkins [23:41] Oh no, they had come from CN Rail, but they were the people who were network operations directors or something like that.


Anna Rose [23:48] Got it. At the time, were there any auditing firms?


Jonathan Wilkins [23:52] Back then, the only people who did audits were accountants. There were sort of the big five consulting firms, and they had very small but rapidly growing groups that would do some security auditing when they were on site. So that was actually the big market for the tool that we wrote, Ballista at Secure Networks, was we had people from Pricewaterhouse who were our clientele. They were an auxiliary kind of group inside the financial accounting firms.


Anna Rose [24:26] Wow.


Jonathan Wilkins [24:26] Who then would do some analysis of your network security? It was mostly just, do you have a firewall, kind of stuff?


Anna Rose [24:33] Is this why we call it auditing today? This almost sounds like this is maybe why. Like the term was borrowed.


Jonathan Wilkins [24:39] Yeah. I'm sure that's why. Yeah, that's where it sort of flowed from. Yep.


Anna Rose [24:42] That's so funny. I didn't know that.


Jonathan Wilkins [24:44] Yeah.


Anna Rose [24:44] So you joined. You were the adversary. You're working in this office. Were those people was -- this is actually a question I have about Zero Knowledge Systems. Today we're used to very remote work, but was everything in an office there? Like did everyone come over to work in this office, or did you have colleagues that were, like, in a different country?


Jonathan Wilkins [25:06] No. It was, everyone was there. Everyone had moved there from all over the world. In fact, Ulf was there from Germany. Adam was there from the UK. A whole lot of people had moved for this job. I'd come from Calgary at the time. And there was an initial office on Saint-Laurent.


Anna Rose [25:26] Yeah, yeah, yeah. That's something that I mentioned in the little bonus episode that I recorded a few weeks ago. The address was 3981 Saint-Laurent.


Jonathan Wilkins [25:37] That sounds right.


Anna Rose [25:38] And I think I told you this when I met you, but this was across the street from a bar that I had been hanging out at at the time, which is a crazy coincidence. Anyway, I think I told you about that.


Jonathan Wilkins [25:48] This was a workplace ahead of its time. There'd been some previous office before that one, I think, or maybe it was they did a redesign of the offices in that building at some point. But there'd be a coffee shop on the first floor, and they just basically adopted the coffee shop, moved it into their fourth or fifth floor offices. And it was just, this is the coffee bar. It's coffee is free.


Anna Rose [26:13] Wow.


Jonathan Wilkins [26:14] But they just -- all the people who'd been previously serving them coffee, they liked them, so they just brought them in-house. And Austin has always been very at the forefront of this kind of thing, and work as play, and a lot of those other things. He knows how to create a space that people find effective and appealing. And after I'd been there for maybe a month or two, if I recall correctly, we shifted over to the new offices, which were on -- what's that main street?


Anna Rose [26:45] De Maisonneuve.


Jonathan Wilkins [26:46] Yeah. East, West? Yeah, De Maisonneuve. 


Anna Rose [26:49] I think so. Yeah.


Jonathan Wilkins [26:49] And it was basically right above one of the Metro line stations.


Anna Rose [26:53] I mean, I know this from the trademark documents that led me to this company in the first place. And it was like 888 De Maisonneuve.


Jonathan Wilkins [27:03] Right. Yep. It was basically at the bottom of Saint-Denis. And it was interesting office. There's like a central atrium that was sort of just you could see down to the mall levels below. It was a beautiful office. A lot of glass, a lot of light, offices enough for everyone. Server room there was epic. It was the kind of thing that you might imagine seeing in a movie kind of thing.


Anna Rose [27:27] Amazing. Because it would have all been on site, right? Like, was there no institutional data centers?


Jonathan Wilkins [27:33] There were, but they were like -- there were big data centers down in California. In fact, Zero Knowledge for a while had its most profitable asset was a data center lease down in California in like Mountain View or something. And I think they'd leased more space than they could use in the lead up to the pinnacle of the dot-com hype. And they had then sublet some of that space to other tech companies. And the demand had gotten so high at that point that it was millions of dollars a month even or something ridiculous. I don't remember what it was. And then that just, poof, gone. So it was a very feverish time for that whole space.


Anna Rose [28:16] I think you hear about like the tech boom and bust, the dot-com bust. There was pets.com. Everybody was investing a lot into startups.


Jonathan Wilkins [28:25] Their Super Bowl ad was one of those, like, markers. Right?


Anna Rose [28:28] But was Zero Knowledge Systems then kind of one of those companies? Did it just -- did it raise a lot at the right moment and took off?


Jonathan Wilkins [28:36] It did raise a lot at that moment and was -- but it was -- some of these companies, it was like, that didn't make any sense. It wasn't one of those that -- you know, someone who had studied computer science somewhere and happened to be in the right place at the right time, just saying, let's do the Internet of coffee, whatever, anything. You could -- at that point, there were people who would invest in anything if you just said Internet or you said --


Anna Rose [29:06] We've seen that also in blockchain and more recently.


Jonathan Wilkins [29:09] I mean, it happens any cycle once there's hype. We've got the AI right now.


Anna Rose [29:16] Totally.


Jonathan Wilkins [29:18] And the nonsense people are going to throw money at on the off chance that they ever get lucky is always happens. But what Zero Knowledge had built was something that was necessary. It was just at that time, the biggest problem was people didn't know that they needed it or if they knew, they thought that those protections should just be provided. If I'm paying for my Internet, I should -- why should I be trackable? And of course, now we know just level to which we're being monetized on a daily basis and our data sold and resold.


Anna Rose [29:50] So you were there for the period that it was -- that Freedom was being built. But Freedom, like you say it was launched, it was out there. But what actually happened to that project? Like did it ever gain any sort of traction?


Jonathan Wilkins [30:04] It had some traction. There were a lot of people using it. It just wasn't enough people to support the business that they had. When I interviewed there, maybe a couple hundred people in the company. Six months later, there were probably about a thousand. The HR team was onboarding like a few dozen people a week kind of thing. It was that kind of hyper growth thing that venture capital seems to demand and expect and encourage. 


And so you're either -- if you're following that ramp, they push you a certain direction and you wind up with a lot of people. Then they try and get you to IPO. And if you manage to get there, then people expect a certain size of company if it's going to be IPO-ing at a certain valuation. So they just try and make those things match regardless of other factors.


What they built was something very valuable and something that we still don't have a good replacement for. Tor notwithstanding, never quite made it there. And certainly if Zero Knowledge, the company, had been around and managed to somehow survive, what would have been built over in the intervening years would have looked a lot different than what Tor wound up looking like.


Anna Rose [31:14] You sort of mentioned these other experiments that were being created in this research group. Did any of those become anything product-y, or like did they go on to be built into something else?


Jonathan Wilkins [31:24] I mean the brand's credential stuff keeps getting rebuilt or proposed or it's a solution in some small product here and there. The brand's credentials, for those who don't know, it's a system by which you can reveal only certain aspects of your identity. If I've got a driver's license, digital driver's license. I don't need to disclose the fact that, here's my address, here's my name, here's my gender, here's my height, weight and picture. If I'm going to a PG-13 movie, all they care about is I'm over 13. So it was a way of saying, providing a I'm over 13 certificate to that context, or I'm over 21 if I'm buying alcohol, or over 18 in Alberta, whatever it is. Being able to just have that limited disclosure is a valuable thing and something that certainly our team was trying to persuade people to do. And limited success, unfortunately.


Anna Rose [32:21] It's interesting because that's something that's still discussed today. There's a bunch of teams today in the ZK space who are using ZKPs to have your passport sort of scanned into a proof, and you can then prove things about that passport to another party. And it's funny because, now some of the tooling is really there that you can make some of these things in like a hackathon project. They can be made quite quickly. Back then, I guess it was just the concepts were still being developed. Like do you know if that was the first time that idea was kind of brought to life?


Jonathan Wilkins [32:54] I mean, Stefan Brands had written his book on them, on selective disclosure of credentials, but I don't think there was an implementation anywhere else. I think it was probably the first time it was put into code outside of Stefan Brand's laptop, maybe, or desktop at the time, probably.


Anna Rose [33:13] Nice. I want to ask you one more question about the Zero Knowledge Systems office, and maybe the first office you were at. And then I want to talk a little bit about what you've worked on since, because I know you've had a big career since then. And I'm asking you to go back to this little sliver of time.


Jonathan Wilkins [33:28] Roughly 25 years.


Anna Rose [33:29] You worked at this company for a year. 25 years ago. But I have one last question, and this was something we had talked last time we spoke, but it was a bit about that building. I think I told you this, that I had been at the time that Zero Knowledge Systems was on Saint-Laurent, I had actually been hanging out a lot at this bar across the street. Have you -- did you ever hear of a bar called Blizzarts? Did you ever go there?


Jonathan Wilkins [33:55] I couldn't say for sure. If it were across the street. It's almost certain that we went there a couple times. I don't really remember the names of any of the places I went to back then, but I do remember, lunchtimes we go to a number of places just around the corner from there for meals and so forth. So I can almost guarantee I was there at some point.


Anna Rose [34:18] You were around?


Jonathan Wilkins [34:19] Yeah. Certainly around. Yeah. I didn't live very far away from there either, so.


Anna Rose [34:25] It's so funny. Cool.


Jonathan Wilkins [34:26] Yeah.


Anna Rose [34:26] And you had also told me that there was a sign.


Jonathan Wilkins [34:29] So at the time, I mean, Zero Knowledge was pretty well known in the city because the pool of engineering talent for software engineering talent in Canada was not huge. And a lot of it was focused on and centralized in Montreal because there was a huge 3D modeling software.


Anna Rose [34:51] There's like a film industry there.


Jonathan Wilkins [34:52] So like two or three different companies that were doing CGI stuff, and some of the cutting-edge stuff at the time, like there's Softimage, there was a [?] with some of the other company names, but there were two or three. And so if you wanted software engineers, you were basically poaching them from someone at that time. And so Zero Knowledge had these trucks that would go around the city with like their really high gloss, like very well designed ads on a big trailer, and they would park them outside of some of these offices and have people there trying to talk to the people who are coming out of the offices and trying to steal them away.


Anna Rose [35:35] Giving out flyers, like going up to them.


Jonathan Wilkins [35:37] Stuff like that. Yeah, like apparently, yeah, there was a pretty hard sell.


Anna Rose [35:42] True guerrilla HR recruiting right there.


Jonathan Wilkins [35:45] Yep, yep, definitely.


Anna Rose [35:46] Wow. I hope I get a chance at some point to speak to maybe one of the founders, like someone who might have organized some of that, because I'd be so curious to hear like how effective it was or where in the city they --


Jonathan Wilkins [36:00] Yeah. I'll definitely put you in touch with Austin, and he'll have a lot to say about that. Austin was very creative about that kind of thing, and he enjoyed doing some of these outrageous things.


Anna Rose [36:13] Cool. I want to now ask you a bit about, like you leaving this project. So you had joined because Freedom was cool. You were going to break Freedom. I guess you got in there, security -- like at first, there was some resistance to actually fixing the security, but then you were able to fix some of the security. Why did you leave?


Jonathan Wilkins [36:34] So what happened was it turned out that Zero Knowledge Freedom wasn't going to pay the bills for a company that size. And so, they got into licensing one small part of the Freedom system, which was, there was a personal firewall was basically built as part of the interface to the network. So it was a small driver that ran on your Windows box, and would take the packets that you were sending out to the network and then instead of just -- it would prevent any other packets coming in in the first place. So you weren't vulnerable to certain exploits at the time. 


But it meant that all that code there made for a pretty good personal firewall. And so they were started selling it as an add-on for your Internet service, like a subscription thing for a couple of extra dollars a month, for like $2.99 a month, you got a personal firewall with your Internet connection. That turned out to be a fairly profitable thing to do. It required far less manpower. At the time, the idea of just working on a personal firewall for a telco --


Anna Rose [37:39] Did not appeal.


Jonathan Wilkins [37:40] Didn't sound appealing.


Anna Rose [37:40] Okay. So it had lost a bit of its -- like it was so edgy and it was so grand the idea.


Jonathan Wilkins [37:46] Yeah. It went from cypherpunk thing to --


Anna Rose [37:40] A Cog.


Jonathan Wilkins [37:46] Yeah, a cog kind of -- yeah, yeah. It was basically for Telus, I think at the time is who was buying it. So that just didn't appeal. It was also my last winter in Canada, and after many, many winters in Saskatchewan, I did a winter in Montreal and tromping through that for months on end, did me. And so, I headed to sunnier climates in California.


Anna Rose [38:18] Got it. So did you part in a good way when you left?


Jonathan Wilkins [38:22] So it was a pretty amusing story. So I had gotten sick of dealing with the people who were running the IT stuff for the company after butting heads with them and them resisting any sort of real security. And I went to Austin and said, look, if you make me CSO, Chief Security officer, I will stay and I will do that. But since you're ditching the whole Freedom Network, that's about the only thing that would keep me here.


And, of course, he did the only sane thing he could and said, no, we'll see you, enjoy. I wish you your best on your future endeavors. But a few years later when Blockstream was coming together, and I'd actually been talking to Adam directly about a lot of Bitcoin-related things at the time. I'd wound up working with Adam at Microsoft for a number of years.


After he left, he'd done some storage startup, and then I'd gone on to a few other companies and you know, we're circling back and I was trying to do a startup that was going to do a personal security proxy that would be able to do -- do man-in-the-middle on all your SL connections and clean up headers and make you less easy to track, and make sure that there wasn't anything funny going on in those connections.


And he was getting into Bitcoin more heavily at the time, and we were both trying to recruit each other. And he wound up meeting up with Austin, getting Austin really into the whole idea of Bitcoin. And they then got some money together from Austin's VC company at the time. And I met them for coffee or something in downtown San Francisco and Austin said, we're getting the band back together. So I was like, I'm in.


Anna Rose [40:16] Cool.


Jonathan Wilkins [40:17] Let's do it.


Anna Rose [40:17] This is pre-founding of Blockstream. So were you into Bitcoin at this point? Like had you been playing with it?


Jonathan Wilkins [40:25] A little bit. So I had heard about it. It was not the first e-cash system that I heard of. At that point, if you were into that whole cypherpunk kind of scene, these things came up every once in a while and you'd be, oh, well, I'll play along with that and see what happens. But it really hadn't caught my attention to any great extent. But then Adam mentioned that there's something there. He was investigating it. He would sit down in town. We met up. I had a meal or two with him and some other folks who were working in the space. Matt Corallo was there. I don't remember everyone else. That was, probably, the first time I met him.


Anna Rose [41:07] Who's that?


Jonathan Wilkins [41:08] Matt Corallo. Blue Matt.


Anna Rose [41:08] Okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [41:09] One of the Bitcoin core developers. He's over at Block now, working on the Bitcoin developer kit, I believe. Yeah. So I learned a little bit about it, was getting into it a bit, and then I got a call to do an interview at Coinbase.


Anna Rose [41:27] Oh. That was already there.


Jonathan Wilkins [41:30] Coinbase was starting.


Anna Rose [41:31] Okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [41:31] Yeah. It was basically 2013.


Anna Rose [41:33] Wow.


Jonathan Wilkins [41:33] And I wound up going interviewing there, and then did a short contract for them when they had some security issue. And so I wound up with a little bit of Bitcoin as my payment. I then spent a lot of time getting into some of the trading stuff with it. I was on a combination of Bitstamp and Bitfinex, which is in its infancy at the time, and I wrote a bunch of libraries for automating their APIs, and sort of did a bunch of crazy trading stuff that was quite psychotic. And leveraged and so forth at the time, which was not a good way to trade Bitcoin. But I learned a lot. The amount of money that that represented at the time was hundreds to thousands of dollars.


Anna Rose [42:24] Yeah.


Jonathan Wilkins [42:25] But not quite Bitcoin pizza money, but it would have been a substantial amount.


Anna Rose [42:31] Wow.


Jonathan Wilkins [42:32] Certainly. But I discovered this book after doing this for months and months. It was a book by Richard Wyckoff, and it was probably how I trade and invest in stocks or similar book like that. And it was basically, all of the things that he's done or he did at the time have been banned. There were techniques like painting the tape. So back then, stocks were traded and the news of the stock being traded was sent around on ticker tape. And so every tick of the market, did it go up or did it go down?


And so there were things you could do. Like if you made the last trade in a tick, you would either mark it red or green. So if you got the last trade in and it was in your -- it was an up trade, it would be green. By timing your trades, you could make it look like the market was green when it wasn't necessarily. These sort of things, if you do them on a publicly traded stock, you would get in trouble. I noticed that if I did this, it would make people pay attention and probably buy. And so, essentially, I went through this book after doing what I was doing for months, and it was like, oh, this -- I mean, that's why it works.


Anna Rose [43:50] That's what it is. Oh my God.


Jonathan Wilkins [43:51] That's what it is. That's what it's called. Oh, shit, that's cool.


Anna Rose [43:51] That's so funny. I mean, there's so much of that. Like pump-and-dumps, they've been around since the 20s.


Jonathan Wilkins [43:57] Oh, for sure.


Anna Rose [43:58] Because there was no regulation, there was no laws about this stuff back then.


Jonathan Wilkins [44:01] Yep. And so much of the stuff you see. Like binary trading and they had what were called buck shops, which were essentially, like a lot of these highly leveraged exchanges. If you are going to trade Bitcoin at 100x leverage, you're gonna go broke. It's just a matter of, it takes hours or days. It's too volatile a thing to do that way. And the people who are running these exchanges, they know that. They're just doing it to take your money because it's an effective way to do so. So all of these things, none of them are new. But I was amused to see how many of these things that I'd sort of figured out on my own turned out to be, oh, well known from the 1920s, first of all. And --


Anna Rose [44:47] Maybe some of them even more ancient, like ancient markets would have had some sort of game that people were playing.


Jonathan Wilkins [44:54] I'm sure.


Anna Rose [44:54] That's funny.


Jonathan Wilkins [44:55] It's also just interesting to see what kinds of things and how the laws evolved. You know, these things were -- you know, he wrote a whole book about it because he thought it was a legit thing to do. And people bought that book and took and did those things for some period of time before the SEC existed or came and cracked down.


Anna Rose [45:14] When is that book from? Is it from the 20s?


Jonathan Wilkins [45:17] Yeah, no. It's from 1922, I think.


Anna Rose [45:20] Oh, wow. Interesting.


Jonathan Wilkins [45:22] So these things were the things that probably caused the stock market meltdown. It was a very interesting way to come across that knowledge, and to have seen markets evolve from nothing. Everyone was learning those things at the same time, because you had a whole bunch of people who'd done tech, had never traded. And then you had a few people who were just coming in from stock exchanges who were sharks, honestly. They knew all these tricks. They could never do them on the real market because they'd been -- they went through school, they studied for their exams for the licenses, and that was basically what those things covered. You can't do this because -- and here was a market they could do it on, because it wasn't banned.


So you still see it to this day. Every time there's a big run up, and there's a bunch of leveraged investments on some platform, you will suddenly see the market turn around and dump through those leveraged shares. And someone's just claiming that money because it's money sitting just there where it need to be taken.


Anna Rose [46:29] Yeah. So going back to your story though. So you were at this time playing around with this stuff, but Blockstream had not yet been founded, but you had been approached, it sounds like -- or you had done a little bit of work in that realm. So you were familiar --


Jonathan Wilkins [46:43] And I was very interested. So the things that struck me about it was, back then, one of the things that you had as a challenge if you were doing security, was that people didn't really care too much about the security of their things. Like you had these RSA secure IDs, for instance. So if you were going to log into a secure server, you had to have this little token that was on your keychain, and it would spit out a different number every few minutes, every minute. So in order to authenticate, you had to provide a password plus this code.


And that was great. It was an improvement in security because it was something you had to know and something you had to have. If you were trying to break into a system like that, you either had to steal one of these tokens or otherwise gain access to it or find some exploit in the actual server code. If there wasn't an exploit like that available, then this was pretty good security.


But the problem was that most people who had these things, you know, sysadmins, programmers, whatever they didn't give a shit about them. They would leave them on their desk while they went for lunch. And so the actual security you were getting from them was maybe less than it should be. But when I saw Bitcoin, I was like, this is amazing because this is something where, if you use the same keys that people are using for their money for authentication, then they're going to care about it. They're not going to leave their wallet with cash just sitting there on their table when they go for lunch. They'll take their cash with them. And so it was a way to -- I hoped to build systems that were going to be more like an authentication tool that you could use in a lot of contexts.


Anna Rose [48:28] Yeah. But it's -- what you're saying is because you have value attached. Like it's so funny. You weren't thinking about it like, oh cool, there's digital currency that is potentially speculative and that you can send it back and forth across the world. You were like, now you have value attached to these important things, these kind of security elements. You won't throw it away the way you do with these RSA badges or whatever.


Jonathan Wilkins [48:53] Yeah. And also I saw a path for those things to get more powerful. You know, if you have a lot of people using them, the cost to make one goes down dramatically. Like if everyone has one in their pocket of some sort, they get so much more powerful. And we're starting to see that now. You know, compare the early USB-based hardware wallets with about 10 characters of space to look at anything, if they had anything at all. Like some of the early ones were just a SIM card that was -- or running Java card and some software that would sign for you, but you had no idea what it was signing. You just plugged it in and it signed something for you, and you hoped that it was signing the right thing, sending the transaction to the right address.


Then we had the Ledgers and the Trezors and they had a little tiny screen. And then you had Coldcard with a much bigger screen. Coldcard Q finally has a decent size screen. And the foundation devices Passport and the Passport Prime which is coming up soon. That's going to be a very, very cool device, and has a lot of applicability, not just as a Bitcoin wallet, but as other things like the Ledger when that came out. We encouraged them. I had a meeting with them to discuss what they had and I was like, you know what you should do? You should do an SSH agent for this and that would be amazing. And if you could use that key and it could be recoverable key instead of being like some of these other systems like a YubiKey, which you couldn't copy. But if you had a YubiKey where you could have a seed that you could then restore from, that would be a much better thing. And so a lot of those things have been realized finally.


Anna Rose [50:35] That's cool.


Jonathan Wilkins [50:35] The idea of having your PGP key recoverable in metal never really caught on, right? But now you can have a long term key store that you can plausibly manage over the course of a lifetime and through disasters potentially.


Anna Rose [50:53] It almost seems like there's been this massive education of private keys and signatures and just knowing that you have this item that only you can ever access and how to protect it. But then there's also this move towards more custodian like -- or I wonder if you see it that way. Like do you think it's becoming more in the direction that people have their own keys? Or do you think that actually there'll be kind of this -- not centralization, but like this grab, this kind of land grab to bring people back under one umbrella where they don't have to deal with the key themselves.


Jonathan Wilkins [51:30] Well, I think it's always going to be a push and pull. People who are initially exposed to the idea of crypto and a lot of them are just like, oh well, that's cool. I can tokenize my art or whatever else it is, or land or all these things. But those things only work if Bitcoin is worth a certain value. If you tried to put all of the property on a blockchain, all the property in the world. If ownership of every single square meter of the planet was recorded on Bitcoin's blockchain, and it was the authoritative source for everything, there would be some hedge fund that was going to spend as much money as it took to rewrite some of that history. And it would be a profitable venture. So they would do it. But we've slowly been growing the amount of value in the network, and as that value is up, the kinds of things that you can do with it get larger.


Anna Rose [52:26] Because the security is so high.


Jonathan Wilkins [52:30] Because the security is high.


Anna Rose [52:30] It starts to get harder to corrupt it by like the 51% attack. Actually, can you -- you can do that in Bitcoin, right? That's the threshold, the 51%?


Jonathan Wilkins [52:41] Kind of. That's the sort of threshold at which you can plausibly rewrite or cause reorgs of the chain. You can't rewrite something early on or anything like that, but you've got a chance of winning a reorg later on. So it's not a super effective attack, but it is something that can make money if people are making mistakes.


So if I'm depositing a million dollars to Bitcoin exchange, and they make that available in my account after one confirmation, and they'll also -- if I make a trade, I can move it off the exchange as well. Then I could do something like move money in, trade it for some other currency, send that currency to myself, and then rewrite the blockchain for 1, 2 block reorg, and that initial send to that market is canceled out, and I just send it to another address that I control. 


That's the kind of thing you do if you have a lot of hash rate. And people have played these games for a while early on when I was just sort of getting started, because it didn't require that much. And people have definitely taken advantage of some of the other blockchains that don't have the hash rate. Every once in a while you'll see [?] Forkcoin get destroyed by this or people get trounced. But this is basic blockchain security. If you're going to transfer a lot of value, you wait more blocks.


Anna Rose [54:07] Did you ever get into the Ethereum world or have you -- would you say you stayed more in the Bitcoin side of things?


Jonathan Wilkins [54:15] From day one, I was skeptical about Ethereum. It was basically Vitalik had gone to the Bitcoin community and some of the forums, IRC channels, and he'd basically ignored any advice that was given to him. And so there were things about do you have an account or do you have a UXTO set? And basically, he just went and said, I'm just going to do it this way anyway. And you have the shit show that the Ethereum Foundation is. You know, it was -- they have managed to do a lot of stuff.


Anna Rose [54:48] Yeah.


Jonathan Wilkins [54:48] But the value of that stuff that they've done is questionable. You had basically rug pull after rug pull after rug pull of these -- someone releases a white paper.


Anna Rose [55:00] ICO.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:01] No code ever gets written. ICO, et cetera.


Anna Rose [55:04] There's been pawns. It's like it's a repeat cycle, actually. It's like the ICO, and then it was the NFT, and then it was now the memecoin. It's not even on Ethereum anymore. It's also on Solana.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:14] And the memecoin stuff is so ridiculous, because you don't even have to write a whitepaper. 


Anna Rose [55:20] No.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:20] You're just --


Anna Rose [55:20] They gave that up.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:21] You're creating a name. You're seeing if like --


Anna Rose [55:26] It's a casino.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:27] You know, [?] Food is going to be popular this hour.


Anna Rose [55:30]For sure.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:31] And it's gambling, but it's entertaining for people, I'm sure, but the relationship to anything productive is far from clear.


Anna Rose [55:40] What was your -- I want to kind of go back to your story, though. So we were -- because, Blockstream, you were part of the founding team. How long did you stay there? Because you don't work there anymore.


Jonathan Wilkins [55:49] No. I was there from early days when it was before we had a name, before we had any of that, when we were trying to get a team together. So, I guess, it was probably late 2013 when I met Austin and Adam, or maybe very early 2014 when we had that conversation about getting the band back to earlier. We had a few meetings where it was like some of the core developers who were -- you know, Greg was working at Mozilla, I think, at the time, and Peter was working at Google, and Matt was finishing off his degree, and Mark was working at NASA.


All these people were doing a lot of engineering in their evenings, but there was no actual anyone really who was working on the core protocol, who had a day job just doing that. Everyone working on Bitcoin core at that time --


Anna Rose [56:38] Was doing it as a side gig.


Jonathan Wilkins [56:39] Had some other thing that was -- yeah, yeah, exactly. So Greg was doing codecs for media at Mozilla, for instance. And so what Adam and Austin were trying to do was get some sort of company together that would allow Bitcoin to grow from that. And Bitcoin didn't have some fees going to development of the project, or there was no core team allocation or anything like that. So getting Blockstream off the ground was sort of like the first way to support those engineers.


Anna Rose [57:12] Is that what Blockstream is today? Is that what it is? Is it sort of like a dev shop that's working on Bitcoin core?


Jonathan Wilkins [57:22] So initially it was conceived of as, let's get something together where the core developers have a salary and are focused on building stuff for Bitcoin and focused on making Bitcoin better. And the number of commits that happened in that first year to the Bitcoin codebase was some multiple of what had been done in the prior several years. And a lot of them were substantial changes, not just like fixing a spelling error or something like that.


And so, it was a success in that regard, I would say. There was a whole bunch of projects, Bitcoin Elements, a whole bunch of things that were proposed, and then adopted into the core protocol. A lot of BIPs written, things like that. That was a good time for Bitcoin, I think. There was a lot of criticism directed their way, there was a lot of suspicion directed their way, there's a whole bunch of conspiracy theories on Reddit and so forth. I don't know if you were around at that time.


Anna Rose [58:18] I got into this whole world in 2017, so different era.


Jonathan Wilkins [58:27] So Block Size Wars back then. But I think by that point a lot of the battles had been won. The shouting wasn't over, but it was essentially done. They'd already gotten some of the SegWit stuff in and the miners were resisting it, but when the blockchain was actually full, they were like, oh, shit, well, maybe we do have to do something about this.


Anna Rose [58:47] When did you leave Blockstream and why did you leave Blockstream?


Jonathan Wilkins [58:51] 2018


Anna Rose [58:51] Okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [58:52] I lost my fiance to suicide.


Anna Rose [58:54] Oh, so sorry.


Jonathan Wilkins [58:56] So I took some time off after that and just didn't wind up going back to Blockstream after that.


Anna Rose [59:02] What have you been up to since Blockstream?


Jonathan Wilkins [59:06] I joined River. I was the founding CSO there as well, and helped them launch and managed their Bitcoin holdings, which was great. One of the last things I worked or had any impact on before leaving Blockstream was the PSBT work, and some of that multisig stuff. That was kind of an area that was lacking in Bitcoin. There were a lot of core issues that made multisig not quite so safe to use. But Coinkite had released the Coldcard, and we were able to put together a very secure setup, and there was something like 6 or 8,000 Bitcoin we were managing at one point. Didn't lose a wink of sleep. So know that bitcoin reached that level of maturity that it could be managed like that, and I didn't have to worry about the Bitcoin getting lost or getting hacked or anything like that, because it was possible to build a good setup.


Anna Rose [01:00:04] Amazing. Do you feel like a lot of those people that you worked with -- I want to bring it back to the Zero Knowledge System story. But a lot of those people that you worked with, did you end up crossing paths with them later in the Bitcoin space? Like did a lot of them end up working on this kind of stuff?


Jonathan Wilkins [01:00:20] Yeah. Adam, of course, did. Other people from that era, I haven't run across a lot of them who weren't also Austin. Jeremy is Austin's brother. He was working on operations and stuff there at Zero Knowledge, and we now have a startup together, Cloaked Wireless or Cloaked Services. One of our products is Cloaked Wireless. And SIM swaps are an issue for people in the space. And we have a system that is security against SIM swaps.


Anna Rose [01:00:49] Given that you've been in security this long, when you think about it, are you -- do you feel safer or less safe today?


Jonathan Wilkins [01:00:57] This is sort of, actually, one of the interesting questions that we had back in the day at Secure Networks was, how long are these bugs going to be a problem? You know, the idea was that buffer overflows shouldn't be an issue 10 years from now. Like the industry will have eliminated this as bug class. No, it hasn't.


Anna Rose [01:01:15] No. Okay.


Jonathan Wilkins [01:01:16] And essentially there are more people writing code, and since there are more people writing code, and only some subset of them know how to write secure code, you have more and more flaws in the available code out there.


So overall, it's possible to engineer something very secure, but 99% of the stuff that gets written isn't written to that standard. So things are probably as secure as they've ever been. And they probably, on the whole, haven't gotten any more secure. One of the first systems that I got into on the Internet was a NASA computer. It was the NASA extragalactic database, and it was available on a telnet system.


You just telnet it to a certain machine IP address, and then if you hit Control C, you were presented with a system prompt. It was just something running in a shell, loops connect to port, and then you could do whatever you wanted on that system. And so, there are things just as simple as that today in other platforms. And there are people who are writing -- a friend of mine has what he calls the Giggle test. If when someone's describing the architecture of something, if he bursts into uncontrollable giggles, that's a complete fail. And it happens a lot.


Anna Rose [01:02:35] Oh, no.


Jonathan Wilkins [01:02:35] People are tasked with things beyond their capacity a lot. And funny things happen when that occurs. So overall, we know how to write secure code, we know how to build secure platforms, we know how to do these things. Bitcoin's actually really great proof of that. The things that are the core of Bitcoin, the uptime of Bitcoin is essentially, it hasn't gone down since it was launched. And that is something that would be considered remarkable to anyone back 20 years ago. The fact that there's a system that is distributed and it just works, and it's money, and no one's just, you know, broken that system in a way that has disrupted the economy that's being built on it. And that's pretty fucking good. That's impressive. That said, you've got all these other chains, secondary tertiary, like clones of things, and it's a circus. It's just a clown show. So it depends on quality of your engineers. That's the way it's always been, so.


Anna Rose [01:03:43] Interesting. Jonathan, thank you so much for coming on and sharing this story. From kind of your start, breaking into sort of computer rooms at universities to working at Zero Knowledge Systems, obviously the project that brought us to meet each other, to the things you did after. I mean, I joined this space in 2017, I joined it in Berlin, which is like an Ethereum hub, more than a Bitcoin hub. And so I was sort of -- I was introduced to a lot of this space through Ethereum. I feel like my Bitcoin history is not that good.


I've had only few people on the show who really live in Bitcoin land, so it's really great to get to hear your story. And, I mean, I do hope to get a chance to also meet with some of the people who you've mentioned through this episode who also worked at Zero Knowledge Systems, but also worked kind of subsequently in the early Bitcoin and what happened after.


Jonathan Wilkins [01:04:38] Happy to introduce you to anyone who I can get you to. Austin seems interested in chatting, so that's another great start. But it's been a pleasure talking to you, and thank you for having me on.


Anna Rose [01:04:49] Thanks so much. And I want to say thank you to the podcast team Rachel, Henrik and Tanya, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.