[Anna Rose] (0:06 - 1:42)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, a podcast where we explore the latest in blockchain technology and the decentralised web. The show is hosted by me, Anna, and me, Frederik. This week we dive into BDFs with Joseph Bonneau, assistant professor at NYU.

We also talk about the future of blockchain and how it will impact the way we use it. Before we start, we want to say thank you to this week's sponsor, Trail of Bits. Trail of Bits recently released a blog post that might be interesting to our listeners who are concerned about privacy.

The post is about the concept of safe browsing. Safe browsing claims to protect users by providing them with something called k-anonymity. However, recent security news has highlighted some privacy concerns.

The Trail of Bits blog post outlines how the safe browsing protocol works and describes why k-anonymity is insufficient in protecting users' privacy. For more on their deep dive into this issue and to learn about their other work on privacy, security, and more, visit blog.trailofbits.com. I will be sharing the link to this post in the show notes.

So thank you again, Trail of Bits. And now here's our interview with Joseph Bonneau. So today we're sitting with Joseph Bonneau, who is an assistant professor at NYU and was previously part of the Stanford Applied Crypto Group.

Welcome to the show, Joseph.

[Joseph Bonneau] (1:43 - 1:44)
Thanks a lot for having me.

[Anna Rose] (1:44 - 1:46)
And we also have Frederick with us.

[Joseph Bonneau] (1:46 - 1:57)
Hello, hello. So we're going to have an exciting episode talking about BDFs, which is an interesting topic that's getting a lot of attention lately, I think.

[Anna Rose] (1:57 - 2:06)
And definitely, in my opinion, something that I don't know enough about and feel like I should. So I'm really glad to have you on the show to talk to us today.

[Frederik] (2:07 - 2:08)
Great. Well, I hope I can help.

[Anna Rose] (2:09 - 2:21)
So I think as we're kind of meeting for the first time, I'm very curious to hear, like, where did you get started on this track towards blockchain slash BDFs? Like, where would you put the beginning of your journey?

[Frederik] (2:22 - 5:21)
Oh, I guess those are two different questions because I was interested in blockchains from, wow, eight, nine years ago. That started when I was in grad school. I was a PhD student at University of Cambridge over in the UK.

And I guess like a lot of research groups, the Bitcoin white paper sort of crossed our desk or email list. It was emailed around. Actually, my supervisor for my PhD, Ross Anderson, he assigned, he basically ordered me to read the white paper one day because we were supposed to, we had a group meeting every Friday and research would always be presented.

And we were supposed to have a speaker come one week and the speaker cancelled. So the day before my supervisor said, OK, we need something to fill in the group meeting. So why don't you read this Bitcoin paper that we've heard about so that you can tell the group what it is.

And I remember thinking this shouldn't be that bad. It's only about a nine page paper. And then it took hours because once I read it, I wanted to go online and fill in some of the details.

It's famously a little bit vague about a lot of technical points about how Bitcoin works. And then I presented at the group meeting the next day and I said, you know, this is a simple paper, but I really think there's actually something new and interesting and tried to convince a room full of 10 or 15 other researchers that this was really an interesting topic. I actually think most of the room rolled their eyes a bit and said, well, we've we've been hearing about digital currency and e-cash for decades and nothing's ever really come of it.

This is probably going to be another entrant in the graveyard eventually. But I was taken. So I kept working on it kind of as a sidelight to my main work.

I finished my Ph.D. I went to Google and was working on the security team and Bitcoin was still a hobby. So it wasn't until 2014 when I went to Princeton as a postdoc where I said part of part of the goal of going to Princeton was to try and work on Bitcoin full time as a researcher and just see is there enough here to write papers and really have an academic research career. And I guess I have to credit my supervisor at Princeton, Arvin Narayanan, who really said, you know, I think this is going to be a big topic that a lot of academics are going to focus on.

So we should start. We should try to be the first. We should teach a class.

Teaching that class led to us writing a textbook. Oh, wow. What's that called?

Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies, which is published by Princeton University Press. The best thing about it, I think, is that it's freely available online, at least the pre-professionally typeset and copyedited version is. You can see basically that the authors pre-draft online.

So that's helped it spread a lot. We have a list online, but it's being used in dozens of different university courses now. So that's been great.

I meet people all the time at conferences who said they picked up the book or they watched. There's some lectures that are on YouTube that accompany it. So that was one of our first big projects, was just putting these materials out.

[Joseph Bonneau] (5:22 - 5:36)
We talked quite a lot to Dan Boneh about education and the state of blockchain education. What do you think of that? Is it in a good state or does there need to be more education?

Where are we?

[Frederik] (5:36 - 7:28)
Well, there's an old saying that the easiest way to start an argument at a university is to ask the question, what should an educated person know? And people have really strong opinions about what's important and what's not important to teach students. I mean, I've taught blockchain courses at three universities now, Princeton, Stanford and NYU.

Kind of roughly the same template, following the textbook, focussing mostly on Bitcoin and Ethereum. I've seen other courses at different universities that take a totally different track. They teach Hyperledger or some other system.

So I think we're still in the state where it's very much unclear what it means to have a class where you learn about blockchains or cryptocurrencies, what should be taught, what are the important systems. And some people take an opinion that it's not worth teaching Bitcoin at all because they think it's not sustainable. It's not going to be around in 10 years.

So it's a waste of time. I think conservatively, Bitcoin is the most sensible to teach, not just because it was first, but because since it inspired most of the other systems, there's sort of pieces of Bitcoin everywhere. So while I kind of agree that Bitcoin might be gone in 10 years, maybe even less time than that, I think that we're more sure that the traces of Bitcoin will be around.

And if you decide to teach another system, if you wanted to teach Hyperledger or Tendermint or Algorand or whatever entrant you have, we have sort of less certainty about what's going to be long lasting and influential there. So there's pretty widespread disagreement about what are the basic fundamentals of the field that people should learn. But besides learning cryptographic primitives, which hopefully everybody teaches in their courses, we don't really know what it means to be an educated person in the blockchain space.

[Joseph Bonneau] (7:29 - 8:06)
It's kind of interesting as well to think about whether you're teaching a specific protocol or the general system and taking it to computer science. Some schools just refuse to teach programming because they think that's like a vocational school activity and you should be teaching math and computer science from core principles. In the same way, teaching Bitcoin or teaching Ethereum is like teaching programming.

But what are the underlying things that you, what are the commonalities that you teach? It's a tricky question.

[Frederik] (8:06 - 8:36)
I think that a similar thing in the blockchain space is some people think it's really important to teach practical skills like how to spin up a Bitcoin node and sync it with the network or how to submit a transaction to the Bitcoin network. Really kind of low level hands on stuff. And others say, well, that's kind of all details and you really should be learning how zero knowledge proofs work or different signature schemes.

So it's really such a big space. We haven't really at all standardised what's important to know.

[Anna Rose] (8:36 - 8:42)
So let's go back to your story. You were at Princeton. What happened after that?

[Frederik] (8:44 - 9:55)
Well, I came out to the Bay Area and was at Stanford for two years and was working with a Stanford crypto group looking for new research projects. And that was around the time I think I'd had the idea of VDFs without before the name existed in that while I was at Princeton and when I came out to Stanford talking to Dan, talking to others, I said, you know, this is always if we had this thing, a VDF protocols would really be a lot better. So I sort of described this is usually how cryptographers start working.

They describe some functionality that they'd like to have. Sometimes they even describe it as what's called an ideal functionality or sort of as an oracle first and say if we had this magic thing, we could build protocols out of it or do some other cool thing. Now we just have to realise, figure out how to realise it.

So, you know, VDFs definitely started that way. I said, if we had this function that had these exact properties, then, you know, it would be really great. And we worked on it for, you know, the better part of two years at Stanford before we had a paper to put out there and which is, you know, obviously led to a lot of follow-up work.

[Anna Rose] (9:55 - 10:02)
So this it sounds like this VDF idea was really coming from you. But you're the paper ends up having a bunch of co-authors. How does that work?

[Frederik] (10:03 - 11:39)
So, yeah, I think you can you can trace the idea to a paper that an unpublished paper just available online that I wrote while I was at Princeton with two co-authors with Jeremy Clark and Stephen Goldfeder. And that paper was about generating a random to speak in or a lottery using the blockchain. And we were looking at the idea, which a lot of people had at the time, this was 2015, of extracting randomness from blockchains, basically by just hashing the most random block in the chain and saying it's fairly hard to predict what the next block is going to be.

I wouldn't say that was our idea. It was happening in practise at the time. A lot of people were using this as a sort of quick and dirty way to get some unpredictable randomness from the blockchain.

We wrote a paper analysing whether or not this was secure and different attacks that could be done by miners or others to try to manipulate the randomness. And there's about two paragraphs in that paper where we say, you know, boy, if you could slow down the process of extracting randomness, if you could pass it through some function that was slow, it would make these attacks a lot more difficult. So that was kind of the germ of the idea where we said if we had this slow function, we could stick it in here and it would strengthen this protocol.

You know, when I showed up at Stanford, I was talking to Dan and others about some problems we could potentially work on. And I sort of went back to that and said when we were writing this paper, there was kind of this gap where we said, you know, if we had this thing, this would really be a lot better. So let's sit down for a while and see if we could build that thing.

[Anna Rose] (11:39 - 11:48)
Then do you get other researchers to join you on it? Or are you using pieces of their work in it? Like, how does that work?

[Frederik] (11:49 - 12:50)
It's a pretty nebulous process. It works differently with different people and different institutions, how academics form teams and write papers. There's actually been some meta-analysis in lots of different fields of how collaboration networks form.

But it's very informal. So, you know, I was talking about this problem to Dan. We talked about it with many other students and people who are around.

People always say, oh, what are you working on? And you'll sort of fill them in on ideas and progress. Some of the students, you know, heard it, didn't continue to work on it.

And it turned out that Ben Fish and Benedict Boones, who were both Dan's students, also thought this was a really interesting problem. Ended up saying, yeah, we're interested. We want to work on this with you.

We had a bunch of meetings. But yeah, it wasn't a more formal process than talking to them about it, you know, over lunch at the Whiteboard. Them getting interested, having ideas that, you know, contributed a lot to the paper.

So that was how that, you know, group of four people writing the paper came about.

[Anna Rose] (12:51 - 13:01)
So I think we should definitely define now what a VDF is. We've talked a lot about the process of making the research, but what is a VDF?

[Frederik] (13:01 - 14:27)
Sure. So I'll add one more side note, which is that it took us a long time just to name this thing. We went through lots of different names, you know, a slow function, a delay function, a unique proof of sequential work.

We ended up settling on verifiable delay function. And I think it's turned out to be a really good name because there's three words, and each one of them is really important. Basically say exactly what it is.

So start with the word delay. It's a function that's designed to be slow to compute. And you have to make a distinction between slow to compute and difficult to compute.

Slow to compute really means that it's slow, even if you have a lot of computers at your disposal. Okay. So there are some things that are difficult, like finding a block, finding the next block in the Bitcoin blockchain, but they aren't inherently slow because if you could throw an enormous amount of computing power, you know, you would make it faster and faster.

So the slowness, the delay really comes from the fact that it's an inherently sequential problem, which means that more computers won't help you. A faster computer with a higher clock speed will help a little bit, but just adding computers working in parallel shouldn't help make it faster. Okay, so that's the delay part, this sequentiality, slowness, even with a lot of computers working in parallel.

[Joseph Bonneau] (14:27 - 14:45)
I have a slight follow-up question on the delay, which is, is the property just that it's slow, like undefinably slow, or is the delay also a specific delay? Like, is it an inherent part of a BDF to say, I want a delay by 10 seconds?

[Frederik] (14:45 - 15:28)
Yeah, so that's a great question. And it should be parameterizable, so you should be able to specify about how long you want the delay to be. Now in practise, it's very difficult to say we want the delay to be exactly 10 seconds or 10 minutes or a specific amount of time, because people can always come up with a slightly faster computer with a higher clock speed that can eat into that.

So usually the parameter is the number of steps of computation that you have to take, and the wall clock time, the real-world time that those take is going to vary depending on what your computer is. But that is very important, that you can adjust the delay, different protocols might need a different length of delay.

[Joseph Bonneau] (15:29 - 15:32)
All right, so let's move on to verifiable.

[Anna Rose] (15:32 - 15:34)
Is that the next word?

[Frederik] (15:35 - 16:22)
Yeah, so the verifiable part means that it's easy for somebody else to evaluate the result of this slow function and check that it's correct. Often that's going to require providing an extra proof, but a verifiable delay function has the property that you can efficiently prove to somebody that you've done this correctly, which is important in all sorts of distributed protocols because ideally you want only one person to have to compute the VDF, and then they can just prove that the result is correct to everybody else and they don't have to re-execute the computation. And then the third word is function.

Function just meaning that there is a unique answer. So for any given input, there's only one output that it can produce. There's not multiple different ways to compute.

[Anna Rose] (16:23 - 16:36)
One thing you kind of mentioned in the history of how this came to be was this idea of randomness. Where does randomness and VDFs connect? Because what you just described does not sound like random at all.

[Frederik] (16:37 - 19:53)
Sure, yeah. It's actually the opposite. It's a deterministic function.

But why don't we talk about the lottery application or the extracting randomness from the blockchain? Because I think that will illustrate why it's important that this function be deterministic. Go back to that basic idea of hashing the most recent block in a blockchain and using that as an unpredictable random beacon.

Okay, so we could say the three of us wanted to do a lottery between us and pick one of us to be the leader of the podcast. We could say the next block that's found in Bitcoin, we're going to hash it and we're going to take the result mod 3 and we would pre-agree if it's a 0, I win, if it's a 1, you win, and if it's a 2, Frederick wins. At first glance, that's a reasonably secure protocol.

It's difficult for us to influence what the next block that's found in the Bitcoin chain is going to be. And it certainly would be hard for us to find one specifically that has the property that its hash is 0 mod 3. But there is an attack on this and the attack would be if you are a miner, you could find a block, you could check what result it would give for the lottery, and if you don't like that result, you don't have to publish the block.

You can just withhold it forever, kind of throw it away, wait for somebody else to find a block. And the more powerful version of that, maybe you're not a miner, but maybe you're able to talk to all the miners and tell them, if you find a block that doesn't produce the lottery outcome that I want, I'll pay you more than you'll earn from publishing the block if you don't publish it. And if you're really sophisticated, you could set up a smart contract on Ethereum that would reward the Bitcoin miners.

So there's been some interesting work about ways you could do this bribery. But that's the idea, is that miners have the ability to not publish blocks that they find. And that's one way to try and manipulate what the next block will be and get a favourable lottery outcome.

So obviously this is fairly expensive. Bitcoin blocks generate a lot of revenue, each block. So if you're going to provide a bribe that's worth more than the block reward, it's going to get costly, but it's possible.

If this lottery had millions of dollars riding on it, it would be worth your while possibly to try to bribe miners in the network to withhold and to try to bias the outcome. So here's where the delay part comes in. Let's say that we say the result of the lottery is going to be the hash of the next block in the chain, then run through a delay function that we believe will take a half an hour to compute.

Okay? Then it's not really possible to bribe miners to withhold a block that doesn't produce the outcome that we want, because they'd have to find the block, compute this function that takes a half an hour, and then they'll know what the result would be and we decide whether or not to bribe them. But of course, after a half hour has passed, probably another block will have been found and published anyway, and at that point it's too late for them to decide to publish or not based on the outcome.

[Anna Rose] (19:54 - 20:12)
So this is what you mean. This sort of makes sense. So the work was more on randomness, and then you realise that there would be this technique that could potentially make randomness more secure and prevent this attack or this lottery.

Is it called a lottery attack? What would you call that?

[Frederik] (20:12 - 20:14)
I would probably call it a withholding attack.

[Anna Rose] (20:15 - 20:17)
So it would prevent the withholding attack.

[Frederik] (20:17 - 21:35)
Yeah, or at least make it much, much more difficult. So this is exactly where it came from. We were reasoning about this attack, and we said if there was a way to make evaluating what we call the extraction function that generates the lottery result from the block, if there was a way for us to make that slow, then it would prevent miners from being able to make a decision about whether or not to withhold until it was too late.

So we started very much with that problem. We just want to make randomness extraction from a block slow, and then we kind of isolated it into this specific cryptographic primitive that is a VDF, and that's where we said, well, it has to have a delay for this whole thing to make sense. We want it to be verifiable so that all of us, the participants in the lottery, can quickly check the result is fair.

We don't have to do the delay function ourselves. And here's where hopefully you can see why it has to be a function. It has to be deterministic so that there's only one possible winner of the lottery.

If there's more than one way to evaluate the VDF, then the same block, it could be evaluated different ways, which would lead to different lottery results, and that would be another avenue for potential manipulation.

[Anna Rose] (21:37 - 21:54)
The example you just gave, the lottery example, this is where the idea came from, but VDFs sound like they're a lot more general. I feel like you could use this for all sorts of things. And I'm surprised that, did this not exist before?

Was there nothing like this in cryptography?

[Frederik] (21:55 - 22:28)
Yeah, it's a really good question. I mean, that's always the hope, is that you can, you find a primitive, a cryptographic primitive, while trying to solve one problem, and it ends up being useful for other people's problems as well, which has happened for the VDF. There have been some other things, some historical antecedents that are quite similar.

In our paper, we actually talk about how if you take any of the three properties away, V, D, or F, that that was another thing that already existed that people had worked on before.

[Anna Rose] (22:29 - 22:33)
So there's a DF, and a VD, and a VF, but not the three?

[Frederik] (22:33 - 23:36)
Exactly. They're not called that. The VD, the verifiable plus delay, is called a proof of sequential work, just as one example.

And I believe that was first published in 2011 or 12. So yeah, that was an object that had been studied, and that has some applications, but not the determinism part. If you take away the delay, if it's just a verifiable difficult function, that's basically proof of work, which is used in Bitcoin and all sorts of other places.

And just a delay function that's not verifiable, that, well, I mean, we proposed that in the 2015 paper because we didn't know how to do the verifiable part, but that's also very easy to build. You could just take a hash function, take SHA-256, a well-known one in the blockchain space, and if you just compose it, so you say compute SHA-256 a million times in a row on the same input, that gives you a delay function. We just don't have any trick to verify that it was computed correctly.

[Joseph Bonneau] (23:37 - 24:19)
So let's try to dig into how they actually work, because when I first heard about it like a year ago or something, it just didn't register with me. Like, how would I write a function like this? And it kind of felt like magic.

Like, how can I write something that is sequential, that will take a really long time to evaluate, but I can verify that the computation is correct? You know, the two didn't add up for me. But then, you know, I think your analogy to proof-of-work is really good because it is essentially like proof-of-work, but instead of having a massively parallelised workload, it's a sequential workload.

But I still don't really know like how you actually write this one.

[Frederik] (24:19 - 26:12)
Yeah, so I should say, you know, you shouldn't feel bad that it's not obvious how to write it. We had multiple academic cryptographers, you know, not working full-time, but spending a fair amount of time thinking about this for over a year before we really came up with anything that worked. And in fact, as soon as we published our VDF paper, two other researchers, you know, solved the problem in a different way that in many ways has some advantages over our approach.

So it's highly non-obvious how to solve this problem. Although I think that's true for most of the great primitives in crypto history. You know, the first time you hear about public key encryption or signatures, they sound like they should be not possible.

I think that's a lot of people's experience taking a crypto course. The first time they see how a signature scheme works or public key encryption, there's kind of a feeling of, wow, I might not have thought of that, you know, in a long time of thinking about it. But once you see it, it kind of makes sense.

So there are generic ways to do this using any proof system that provides succinct proofs. You know, you may be familiar with some succinct proving systems like, you know, snarks that show up in a lot of different places in the blockchain space. And generically, we know how to provide a succinct proof for any long-running computation.

Okay, so this is used for a lot of different applications around the cryptocurrency space. So you can build a VDF that way by taking a delay function, which, like I said, could be as simple as iterating a hash function many times in a row. And then you could take any system that provides succinct proofs and just provide a proof that this long chain of hash functions was evaluated correctly.

[Joseph Bonneau] (26:13 - 26:19)
So like running Blake 2 a thousand times inside a snark would be a VDF? That would be a VDF, yeah.

[Frederik] (26:20 - 27:05)
That should at least, you know, give you a hint that this is possible. It turns out not to be a very efficient VDF for a couple reasons. You know, for it to provide an adequate delay, a thousand iterations of Blake is probably too few.

You'd probably want at least on the order of billions because a computer can, you know, a fast ASIC can certainly compute those in seconds. So when you start thinking about how big the circuit's going to be to prove that you've correctly done a billion iterations of Blake using a snark, the numbers get really, really massive. It would take a very, very long time to compute that proof.

Everything would work. It would actually still be a succinct proof that was fast to verify, but the proving time would be really, really large.

[Anna Rose] (27:06 - 27:20)
Can I ask something? This is totally like a 101 question, and it might just be that my brain isn't working, but when you use the word succinct, I don't always understand what that means. Like, it's used all the time, but what is succinct?

[Frederik] (27:21 - 29:04)
Yeah, so there's kind of a technical definition. You know, the high-level definition, succinct just means short, so we do some really big computation and provide a very short proof that it's correct. There's a technical definition in crypto of how short it has to be to be succinct, but probably suffices here to just say it means that there's a short proof of correctness, and the size of the proof grows only extremely slowly relative to the size of the computation, so you could basically think of doing any computation imaginably, and the proof would still be very, very small.

Cool. Right, so you might ask, given the fact that, you know, I just told you that the generic construction for trying to build a VDF ends up having a very long proving time, you know, what can you do about this? So in our 2018 paper, we described a lot of tricks and ways to make this generic VDF idea more efficient, and those included, you know, breaking up the chain of iterated hash functions into pieces and computing the proof separately so that you can use some parallelism on them as the prover.

They included using a very special function, so not Blake, but a much more efficient one-way function that does well within a proving system. But the most competitive VDFs that we've seen were published very quickly after our paper came out by two different researchers who were independently interested in the same problem, and both of them use the same algebraic option, which is squaring in a group of unknown order.

[Anna Rose] (29:05 - 29:06)
Who are those researchers?

[Frederik] (29:06 - 31:23)
Right. So I guess I wanted to provide a URL, vdfresearch.org, which is a very nice page that has a list of all the important papers that have been written on VDFs. And it gets a little confusing because they have very similar names.

So the paper that we published in 2018, and by we, that was myself, Dan Bonet, Benedict Bunce, and Ben Fish, is just called Verifiable Delay Functions. And you'll note on the website that we published on June 12th. On June 20th, there was a paper by Ben Wesolowski called Efficient Verifiable Delay Functions.

And on June 22nd, so this all happened within 10 days, there was a paper by Krzysztof Piotrczak, hope I'm pronouncing his name correctly, but it's a difficult one, called Simple Verifiable Delay Functions. And then since then, there have been papers called Continuous Verifiable Delay Functions and Tight Verifiable Delay Functions. But just to talk about the two papers that followed up on ours very closely, the efficient and the simple, usually they're actually just, the constructions in those papers have sort of been named after the authors now.

So there's the Wesolowski construction and the Piotrczak construction. But both of them are based on the same idea for building a delay function. We'll get to the verifiable part in just a second.

But that's to take the operation of repeated squaring in a group of unknown order. And so what does that mean? What is a group of unknown order?

It turns out it should be very familiar to people who have a crypto background. Any group that is used in RSA cryptography, so just a large composite number product of two large primes, provides a group of unknown order. So this has been the basis of RSA cryptography, signing and encryption for a long time.

And I should say RSA cryptography, even though it's very old, it's been used widely on the internet and lots of other places. The RSA construction has not traditionally been used in blockchains, right? Bitcoin uses ECDSA, not RSA signatures.

So RSA, maybe for people who got into cryptography in the blockchain age, not something that they're familiar with.

[Joseph Bonneau] (31:24 - 31:30)
I think, am I wrong here? Or does RSA basically require a trusted setup?

[Frederik] (31:30 - 35:11)
Yeah, so it does require a trusted setup to generate this number that's the product of two large primes, nobody knowing the two primes, the factorisation. But we should circle back to that because there's a way to use these constructions without the trusted setup. So sort of put a pin in that.

Imagine that we have this large number N, which is the product of two large primes and nobody knows the primes. The basic step that's used to build a delay function in both the Wieselowski, the Peterzak construction, you take a number mod N and you square it. And then you square it again.

And every squaring is one step in your VDF. So it's a very, very simple function. You just take a number, you square it, you reduce mod N, and then you square it again.

And you do as many squarings as you think you need to induce the delay that you want. So if you want to delay on the order of seconds, maybe you compute a billion squarings. If you want to delay on the order of minutes, you might need a trillion squarings or more.

That provides a delay function without knowing the order of the group. We don't know a more efficient way to compute, say, a trillion squarings in a row. And you can also express a trillion squarings a row as saying, you know, take your input and raise it to the power 2 to the 40 or whatever your choice is for your delay parameter.

And I could say here, as a historical note, that this idea of squaring mod N and using it as a delay or a function that's sequential, that is an old idea dating at least to the 1990s. So there was a proposal in the 1990s called time lock encryption. And the idea was that you would encrypt some data with a property that you wanted people to be able to read it in the future, but not now.

So you want anybody to be able to read it in the future, but it to be a secret for now. And the way that time lock encryption was built, the construction that was provided was also based on squaring mod N. So you basically provided a number, and you said, if you square this number a trillion times, maybe more than a trillion times, then the result you get will be a key that is used to decrypt the data.

And again, that had a trusted setup to build, so, you know, very different than the VDF setting, but using this same basic idea of squaring mod N, squaring in a group of unknown order as a slow function. Okay, so that idea was old. You know, our group at Stanford was also well aware that this was a good candidate for building a delay function.

The part that we didn't know how to do, and nobody knew how to do, publicly at least, that we know about until June of 2018, was to make that verifiable. Okay, so how can I take a number, square it a trillion times, mod N, and prove to you that I did every one of those squarings correctly? It's very interesting, because we now know two different ways to do this proof that work very differently under the hood and have different properties, and they were proposed, at least officially, within two days of each other by two different researchers.

And, you know, since then, a lot more people have looked at the problem, and we have some tricks around those two constructions, but that's basically it. We know two ways to do it, and, you know, essentially no other ways to do it. So it was a very, very exciting time, June of 2018, where we learned so much about VDFs in a short period of time.

[Joseph Bonneau] (35:13 - 35:28)
I'm super curious to hear more about how these proofs actually work, or, like, what proofs they are, even if it's just, like, where do I find more info on it? So what are these proofs, and maybe how do they differ from each other?

[Frederik] (35:28 - 37:57)
Okay, sure. So I should preface by saying that both are, they're somewhat complicated to get your head around. I had to stare at both papers for quite a few hours to feel like I really understood what was going on, even though both can be described in only a couple of pages.

Maybe I'll start with the Peterzak proof. It has, so I should say, both of these proofs are very ad hoc. They exploit specific algebraic properties of working in a group of unknown order.

So they're quite different from generic zero-knowledge proof techniques like SNARKs that you may have seen that work for any statement. This is a very specific proof that is designed, you know, only to prove that a number was squared a certain number of times mod N. So the basic idea behind the Peterzak proof is you take the midpoint of the computation.

So, you know, you're taking an input x and you're squaring it a trillion times mod N. There's some value, call it y, that is x to the half a trillion, or x squared half a trillion times. And if you take that number and square it half a trillion times, you get to the output.

So the Peterzak proof exploits this algebraic structure that there's a similar relationship between x and the midpoint and between the midpoint and the output. And that you can actually verify that both of those two pairs of numbers, x and the midpoint and the midpoint and y, have this same relationship. And this could be checked efficiently using only half a trillion squarings.

Okay, so the prover actually provides a few numbers that would let the verifier check that both numbers have the same relationship, only doing half a trillion squarings instead of doing all trillion squarings themselves. So that's the basic idea, is that you can reduce the amount of work to verify by half. But then the beautiful part that gets you to a nice efficient proof is that you can actually recursively do this.

So once the verifier has to check that this pair of numbers each has this half a trillion squarings relationship, you can do the same proof technique again to get it down to a quarter of a trillion squarings. And eventually you get it down to just one squaring that you have to do. And it only requires a logarithmic amount of work by the prover to keep basically dividing the amount of work that the verifier has to do in half.

[Joseph Bonneau] (37:57 - 37:59)
That makes sense.

[Frederik] (37:59 - 40:58)
And so the size of that proof ends up being logarithmic. So if you're verifying 2 to the 40 squarings, you need to send on the order of 40 things to the verifier. So it's fairly short, but it grows slowly with the difficulty of the VDF that you're verifying.

If I can change gears and talk about the Wesolowski proof, which is quite different, it's very, very elegant when you see it written out because the prover only has to provide, I believe, two things to the verifier. So the basic idea of the Wesolowski proof, it's easier to think of in terms of an interactive proof where the verifier is actually asking random questions of the prover. I'll imagine that you're the prover, so you claim that some value y is equal to x squared a trillion times mod m.

And I say, okay, well, if that's really true, I want you to provide x to the trillion, or x squared a trillion minus some random number of squarings, and then I'll do the rest of the computation myself. So the basic idea is I query you on a random point in this chain of values that you get by repeatedly squaring. So you don't know in advance which value I'm going to ask for, which means you have to have stored all of these values.

But then I can sort of quickly check that this value gets to the endpoint. And that's why it's a very, very short proof. You basically just have to provide this one thing.

So cryptographers know a generic way to make any interactive proof non-interactive. It's called the Fiat-Shamir transform or sometimes the Fiat-Shamir heuristic. And the way it works is the prover simulates having this verifier by taking their answer, hashing it, and using that result to choose a random query that they then have to answer.

And that's nice, because then it provides a proof that you can just publish and anybody can verify. So the advantage of the Wieselowski proof construction is that the proof is much shorter, and the proof is actually a constant size no matter how difficult the VDF was. So no matter how many squarings you've done, it's always the same amount of information that you have to provide to prove it.

The downside is that if you do it simply, it requires you to not only square, say, a trillion times, but actually to remember every intermediate result in the computation so that no matter which one you're asked for, you're able to provide it to the verifier. In practise, there have been a lot of improvements made to this since the original publication, and the published paper by Wieselowski has most of these improvements. So you don't have to actually have memory equal to the number of steps in the computation.

[Joseph Bonneau] (40:59 - 41:27)
Cool. So, yeah, I mean, there's all these VDF competitions around as well that both try to find better research, but I guess mostly find efficient implementations, and something I want to switch to in a little bit as well. But I think there's also a competition for providing an efficient VDF in a class group instead of a group of unknown order.

What's the difference there?

[Frederik] (41:28 - 42:46)
Great. So a class group actually is a group of unknown order. It's just a different construction.

So the downside of working in what we call an RSA group is that it relies on a trusted setup. Somebody is supposed to choose two large random primes, multiply them together, publish the results, and then throw away the primes so that nobody knows the factorisation of n. And the VDF falls apart and becomes very quick to compute if you know the factorisation of n, if you know the order of the group.

And the technical reason for that is that you can take this large exponent, like 2 to the 40, and just reduce it, modulo the order of the group, and then do a much shorter exponentiation. So it's much simpler to describe. It's much more intuitive for people to think about squaring mod n.

But algebraically, the important thing is that you're squaring within a group of unknown order. The interesting thing is that we know this one other construction of a group of unknown order, which is called a class group, that can be created with no trusted setup. So the trusted setup problem goes away.

Now, the algebra gets a little bit more complicated. It's certainly less intuitive and familiar to people. But we know how to do it, and we know that the math works out.

[Joseph Bonneau] (42:47 - 42:57)
And I guess the downside is that the implementation of operations in a class group are really slow currently. So I guess that's what the competitions are about, to speed those up.

[Frederik] (42:57 - 44:37)
Yeah, so it's interesting. It's not a problem per se that operations in a class group are slow because the whole point of a VDF is to be slow. So the slowness isn't the issue.

The issue is that we don't know how much faster they can be made to be with an optimised implementation. RSA cryptography has been around for a very long time. People have thought a lot about how to square mod n efficiently.

There's been a lot of work on efficient implementations, especially in hardware. So we have more confidence that we can reason about how quick this can be made to be. Whereas for class groups, they haven't really been used in practise for anything, as far as I know.

The implementations are all sort of research quality code. There hasn't been an industrial implementation or a hardware implementation. So we don't know how much faster a well-resourced attacker could make class group arithmetic.

And this is interesting because when you use VDFs in practise, the interesting security question is always, how fast can my attacker compute this function? And you want to reason about some speed that you don't think it's practical for an attacker to go faster than. And the better you're able to estimate that, the more secure the VDF is, in a sense, because you have more confidence that if you think that this function can't be computed in less than 10 minutes and an attacker shows up and can compute it in one minute because they have some algebraic speedup for the arithmetic that you didn't think about, that might really change the security properties of whatever protocol you're using the VDF for.

[Joseph Bonneau] (44:38 - 45:21)
Yeah, I think this is a problem or a thing that I hear a lot and a lot of confusion about with VDFs is, say that VDFs existed when Bitcoin was first built and deployed and they included a VDF that should take 10 minutes. And now, 10 years later, CPUs are so much better, maybe even implementations and code is so much better. This thing now just takes one minute to compute or whatever.

What's the impact of time, long time, years, on how long a VDF actually takes? Should blockchains be worried about this and redeploy or reconfigure their VDFs with regular intervals? What does it take to actually use one in practise?

[Frederik] (45:21 - 46:42)
Yeah, so VDFs, there's this parameter of the number of steps, the number of squarings, for example. That you take. So you can always make that larger to keep up with Moore's Law and to keep up with better technology making faster processors.

So that part's fairly easy. If computers get twice as fast, you require the VDF to take twice as many steps. The difficult part is, what if your adversary has a better computer than you do or a better implementation?

They have some algebraic tricks to speed up the computation that you don't know about that allows them to compute ten times faster than you. And that's why I think the perception is that an RSA-based VDF is more, it's certainly easier to reason about and is a more conservative choice right now because we have more confidence that there aren't big speedups to be found algebraically in squaring mod N. And that's also where the contest comes in.

People who are interested in using VDFs and avoiding the trusted setup for an RSA group and so therefore using class groups, they hope that by having these contests to encourage people to come up with optimised implementations, we'll get a better understanding of how fast you can make this go.

[Joseph Bonneau] (46:44 - 46:45)
Yeah, makes sense.

[Frederik] (46:45 - 48:02)
So I wanted to add about the trusted setup requirement for an RSA-based VDF. There is another way to potentially get around this besides using class groups, which is to use secure multiparty computation to choose N, to choose the modulus of the group. So secure multiparty computation allows a group of people to compute a function, and as long as one of them is honest, they don't all collude with each other, you could compute that number N and nobody would know the prime factors.

This generic technique was already used for Zcash, for example, to do the trusted setup for the SNARK system that they were using, which was done in a ceremony with many participants with the hope that they would all have to be compromised for the trusted setup to be undermined. So there has been some work. This is something that's never been done in practise before, choosing an RSA modulus via secure multiparty computation.

But there are a group of researchers working on this who think that it's within reach, it's something that we could do in the next year, and that would be a way to avoid the trusted setup at work in the slightly more well-known RSA groups.

[Joseph Bonneau] (48:03 - 48:34)
Cool. It also just struck me that speaking about all these contests and speeding things up and the time-lock puzzle thing that you mentioned earlier, I believe I read somewhere there that it was some university, someone put out one of these time-lock puzzles that were supposed to take 40 years to unlock, and some group of people who were designing ASICs for VDFs figured out a way to unlock it in the next six months or something.

[Frederik] (48:35 - 50:52)
Yeah, I believe it was MIT who did this, and that's where the original research on time-lock encryption happened. In general, I would say it's much more difficult to reason about an adversary's computing ability over a span of decades. Fortunately, for most of the applications of VDFs, you really only need to reason about it on the span of minutes or hours, where we have hopefully a much better idea of what an attacker is able to do.

There is always, in any VDF system, it's an unknown question how quickly an attacker's able to compute the function. All we can really do is estimate, and hopefully we can say an attacker's not able to compute it in less than a minute or less than 10 minutes, even if it takes an honest party, say, an hour. If that's the best-known implementation we know of, we hope that an attacker doesn't have some much, much fancier hardware that lets them go in under a minute or whatever parameter we need.

But figuring out that gap, the gap between the adversary's computing speed and the honest party's computing speed, that's kind of the big unknown question with VDFs. It's much more of an art than a science right now, reasoning about this nebulous, potentially really well-funded attacker that can do things like use exotic semiconductors, not just a silicon semiconductor, but these fancy, really expensive ones that need to be supercooled and can run at really fast clock speeds. It's an area that certainly cryptographers haven't really worried about very much before.

In most areas of cryptography, we worried about a well-funded parallel attacker who might use a million computers to try to compute discrete logs or crack an AES key or something like that. For VDFs, we have to worry about an attacker who's constructing one computer that's designed to run at a really, really high clock speed to speed up the VDF. And it's just sort of an exotic attacker model that the community hasn't really had to deal with before.

So in some ways, we're sort of lacking expertise, and even in some cases, the sort of language and definitions to reason about such an attacker.

[Anna Rose] (50:53 - 51:23)
I actually want to definitely spend some time talking about the ways that VDFs are actually being used, because so far, we've focused a lot on the definitions and some of the challenges. But we started back at that example, the lottery example. That one was very clear.

That's kind of where this idea came from. But what is it being used for now? Because you kind of hear talk of VDFs in all these different contexts.

So where are the big groups you see being used right now?

[Frederik] (51:25 - 51:45)
So the simplest answer to where VDFs are being used right now is nowhere. As far as I know, there isn't today, October 2019, there isn't a practical protocol that is using VDFs in kind of the modern sense on a deployed basis.

[Joseph Bonneau] (51:46 - 52:04)
I think there's a lot of people who speculate to use or have to some degree said that they will use VDFs. I mean, Therium 2 is one example. Chia wants to use them in some way.

I have an interesting case that we're toying with as well on how to use them.

[Frederik] (52:04 - 57:16)
Yeah, so they're showing up in a lot of people's white papers. They're in a lot of designs. But as far as I know, they're not deployed anywhere.

One reason for that is that you really want a hardware implementation available for the honest users of the system before you deploy. Because if you assume that the adversary can build hardware to compute the VDF, but you don't have hardware yourself, then the gap between your computation speed and the adversary's is going to be really, really big. So that's why for Ethereum in particular, also, I believe Protocol Labs have been interested in funding a consortium to actually build some VDF hardware so that it can be used with more confidence knowing that there's hardware available to honest parties to evaluate this thing.

But that was just kind of my general disclaimer that as far as I know, people aren't using them in practise yet. But they are showing up in lots and lots of, there are lots of use cases where people are planning to use them. With the caveat that it's explorative, kind of speculative, there are a lot of other interesting use cases.

So we talked about using a VDF to generate a random beacon or to run a lottery using a blockchain and to prevent attacks where blocks are withheld or other manipulation is attempted. This also comes up a lot in proof-of-stake protocols and other similar things, which really are running a lottery under the hood. So in a lot of proof-of-stake protocols, there's a sort of built-in lottery that randomly selects from among a group of validators to find blocks or be on a committee or otherwise have a specific role in a protocol.

So that's kind of an immediate jump to say, we can use VDFs to strengthen sort of internal lotteries that select protocol participants to have a certain role. There's also lotteries not using blockchains at all. So there's a famous, very old idea, over a century old, to generate a lottery result based on asset prices, based on stock prices.

So the idea is basically that we want to run a lottery. What we'll do is we'll take all of the closing stock prices and then, you know, say the New York Stock Exchange or maybe some selection of large cap stocks. It's very difficult to predict what all those stock prices will be tomorrow.

So we can take all those stock prices, hash them, and use that as the lottery result. There's some very interesting history. This was done in many different cities in America by organised crime who were running local lotteries.

I learned a lot about the history of this actually after getting into VDFs, but state lotteries mostly were created in the 1950s and later. So prior to that, people have always liked to gamble, and lotteries were mostly run by organised crime in different cities. Of course, they had the problem of convincing all of the players that they were actually picking the winners randomly.

So what they did is they would usually pick a couple of stocks and they would use the last digit of the stock price in the paper the next day as the numbers that would win the lottery. So you can read all about this. It was usually called the numbers game or the numbers racket, and it was a very clever way for an illegal lottery that didn't have the force of law to verify that it was being done correctly to convince everyday users on the street that something random was actually happening.

But you can think about using this idea in maybe a more modern setting to convince people that you're generating a random number, and you could think about using a hash function, taking more stocks and hashing the stock prices. And then you can say, what's the attack? If you wanted to manipulate this, if you were a stock trader, how would you do it?

It's conceptually very similar to manipulating the blockchain-based lottery. You would wait until the very end of the trading window, 4.59 p.m. You would look at what the lottery outcome is about to be if there's no further movement in any stock prices. And then you could say, maybe I could execute one more trade and I could push the price of various stocks up or down by a penny or two, and that would generate a totally different lottery outcome.

And if you happen to be some high-frequency trader with the ability to make the last trade of the day, you would then have a lot of options for what the lottery outcome would be. But basically the same defence using a VDF would work here. If you take all of the stock prices, hash them, run the result through a VDF, it takes an hour, then that trader sitting there at the end of the day wouldn't be able to evaluate what different manipulations of stock prices would actually do.

By the time you've computed the results of any manipulation, it would be far too late to make a trade and actually manipulate the thing. So I think it's very interesting that this totally different source of randomness from the real world, not blockchains, but stock markets, you could also protect using the same idea, just run the thing through a VDF.

[Anna Rose] (57:17 - 57:54)
In a way, though, going back to the use case question, what it sounds like is if you need real randomness, you really want to make sure that it couldn't be affected, then a VDF could come in handy as another technique in order to promote that or to provide that. Actually, we have a whole episode just on randomness with Justin Drake that we can link to. But for this episode, maybe we should just say quickly, where in the constructions do we see randomness being necessary?

Because I imagine in those places, VDFs will also be useful, but in the blockchain context. We mentioned POS, but I feel like there's other stuff too.

[Frederik] (57:55 - 58:25)
Yeah, so proof of work kind of elegantly gets the randomness from everybody randomly searching for a solution. Proof of work doesn't explicitly need randomness in the same way. Even in some non-proof of stake, some more static Byzantine consensus protocols, there are things like random elections of a leader.

Again, you can use VDFs to make that random selection much more difficult to manipulate.

[Joseph Bonneau] (58:27 - 59:11)
There's obviously many uses of randomness in applications, so not on the blockchain, not on layer one or whatever you want to call it, but in the application itself. One use case that we have is you want to hold a candle auction. This is another super old concept where there used to be auctions and you wanted to prevent price sniping, and you would light a candle, and by the time the candle had burnt out, that's when the auction ended.

That's how the auctioneers got randomness. If you want to do the same in an online context or on a blockchain, then what is your candle? It can be a VDF.

[Anna Rose] (59:11 - 59:15)
That's such a nice metaphor. I like that.

[Frederik] (59:15 - 59:29)
Yeah, that's really interesting. It's not totally clear to me that the VDF applies directly to this example because we think about VDFs usually as having a deterministic number of steps.

[Joseph Bonneau] (59:29 - 59:44)
Yeah, but if you run your auction, you run your auction for, let's say, 20 blocks. Then you start your VDF, and the VDF gives you a number between 1 and 5, and that's how many blocks from the end your auction ends.

[Frederik] (59:44 - 1:00:02)
I see. Yeah, that's really interesting. I hadn't thought of that application before, but that makes a lot of sense.

If you want some basically random result, how much extra time to add, and you want it not to be available until a point in the future. Yeah, that's quite elegant.

[Joseph Bonneau] (1:00:02 - 1:00:07)
I was going to say, for the record, I didn't think of it what three foundation researchers did.

[Frederik] (1:00:07 - 1:04:33)
Okay. I could also add that there are some applications of VDFs that don't have to do with randomness. One that I've heard more and more about recently in the last year is using VDFs to prevent front-running.

The problem with front-running usually is that I see you trying to place some order, and then I try to quickly generate another order and broadcast it on the network ahead of you. There's the idea if you require every order to be broadcast along with a VDF designed to take 5 or 10 minutes, then you can prevent or make front-running much more difficult because when I see the order that you're trying to make, I can't quickly produce another order with a VDF that took 5 minutes to rush onto the network ahead of you. By the time I see your order decide the order I'd like to replace it with, the VDF will take so long that I'm not able to get my order in ahead of you.

I think this is a really interesting idea. There is an important caveat to it, to doing this securely, which is that the attacker can try and pre-compute VDFs for different types of orders and then decide which one to broadcast. For example, if you're just going to broadcast something very simple like buy or sell, and I know that I will either broadcast my own order that says buy or sell based on what you did, then I can just beforehand compute the VDF on buy and on sell.

I can do two of them in parallel, and then I can have both orders ready to go, and based on whatever you broadcast, I can still try to front-run you. This anti-front-running idea requires something so unpredictable that I can't pre-compute all plausible values. I can't pre-compute the VDF result for them.

But aside from that caveat, it's a very, very interesting idea to use VDFs to prevent front-running by essentially proving that whatever order you're broadcasting, you had in mind for some period of time right before broadcasting it. There's another idea, which is to use VDFs for timestamping. For example, say I had a secret idea, and I wanted to prove that I had the idea a year ago.

I just didn't tell anybody about it. I could broadcast the idea today along with a VDF that was computed on some hash of the idea, say a hash of a PDF describing the idea, and if the VDF delay parameter was chosen so long that you were convinced it would take a year to compute, then I could publish the idea along with the VDF proof, and that would be sort of a non-interactive proof that I had this idea a year ago. This conceptually is a really interesting idea because you can do timestamping in a purely computational way without relying on any trusted third parties or any timestamping service.

I don't think it's the most convincing real-world application of a VDF, and the reason is that your uncertainty about computation speed becomes really important, right? If I actually computed it three months ago, that would have very different implications than a year ago. So maybe like a factor of two or four speedup that I have that you don't know about really changes the properties of the system, whereas in most of the other cases we've talked about, in the randomness case, we can build some safety margin into the protocol and say, well, even if the attacker can go twice as fast, it still won't be fast enough to actually manipulate the blockchain, so that's okay. But for the timestamping application, you have to nail it, basically. You have to know exactly how fast the fastest implementations can go and know faster, or else you really don't have that much confidence about the exact age of something.

And it also might not be the most compelling application because we do have other ways to timestamp things, right? You can publish a commitment to them on the blockchain and just not tell anybody about it. It's a little bit less elegant and pure than this computational timestamping idea with VDFs, but it's possible.

We know how to do it.

[Anna Rose] (1:04:34 - 1:04:46)
Well, you never know, too. I think even exploring these use cases, even if they don't seem pragmatic right now, there could be some application where it is. That seems to happen.

[Frederik] (1:04:47 - 1:05:20)
Yeah, I think there are... We still don't know. I think there will be a lot of other applications of VDFs.

I hope so, because they're kind of an interesting and fun thing to think about. And it's certainly been the case historically with cryptography that people came up with hash functions, say, a long time before people said, well, they can be used for proof of work, and they can be used for authenticated data structures, and that means blockchains and cryptocurrency and everything else. I hope VDFs will be around for a long time and people will come up with a lot of use cases for them that we haven't thought of yet.

Cool.

[Joseph Bonneau] (1:05:21 - 1:05:33)
Thank you so much for coming on to the show and talking about VDFs. That's been super interesting. I think it's been really enlightening to actually dig in and explain how these things work.

So thank you very much.

[Frederik] (1:05:34 - 1:05:37)
Yeah, thanks so much for having me. This was a lot of fun.

[Anna Rose] (1:05:38 - 1:05:41)
Where should people go if they want to find out more?

[Frederik] (1:05:42 - 1:06:04)
I think that the best one-stop site to go to is vdfresearch.org, and there's links to the most important papers in this space and also a lot of talks. You can see some talks that actually go through the algebra, explain how the constructions work, explain how some of the protocols work with fun animations, and that's a great way to get a better feel for it.

[Anna Rose] (1:06:05 - 1:06:11)
Well, listen, thanks so much for coming and sharing all this. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.

[Joseph Bonneau] (1:06:11 - 1:06:12)
Thanks for listening.