Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host Anna Rose. In this podcast,we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Nico and I chat with Andrew and Vivek from Cursive. We catch up with them about what led them to start working on a series of activations and experiments using programmable cryptography. We map out the timeline of these activations. Often, they were part of in-person events, including events like zkSummit11 and zkSummit12 last year. They walk us through some of the challenges and also insights they had as they speed ran the deployment of experimental applications using experimental libraries with real users.


Cursive is one of the teams I feel are on the edge of the application development front in ZK and in the adjacent fields like MPC and FHE, and they've been working on some concepts that I think could be quite powerful in the future. Concepts like passively sharing digital signals from private user devices or what they call digital pheromones, as well as the idea of narrowcasting.


Nico and I have actually mentioned these concepts before on the show, so it was great to get a chance to catch up with the team who invented them.


Now, before we kick off this episode, I want to share a few things from our ecosystem. First, if you haven't seen it yet, zkSummit13 is happening in Toronto on May 12th. Applications to attend just opened. Space is more limited than usual this time around as our venue caps out at around 400. So we are encouraging people who really want to join to get their spot secured early. It is invite only, and we do prioritize previous attendees and long term members of the ZK community. So if you're newer and you really want to join, just aim to apply early for a better chance of getting a spot. The application to speak can be found in the same form. The deadline to apply to speak is March 15th.


Next up on the ZK Hack front, if you don't know, ZK Hack is a hub for learning about ZK. If you're just getting into the space, this would be a really good place to check out. One of our projects there, the ZK Whiteboard Sessions, just wrapped up. We released our final two modules in the past month. These were hosted by Dan Boneh. They were focused on FRI and proximity proofs. We also completed our first study group that went through these videos kind of in detail, but we are looking to launch a new one in the coming months focused just on these FRI modules. So if that's interesting for you, be sure to head over to the ZK Hack Discord. I'll add the link to that in the show notes. That's where we organize the study groups.


I also just want to mention that ZK Hack Seoul has been unfortunately postponed. We weren't able to secure the venue that we needed, and so we've decided not to do the event this year. In the meantime though, we are hosting ZK Hack meetups in Sofia around the ZKProof's event, and in Denver right around the ETHDenver event. We are also developing our next hackathon. It will probably be in Berlin in June around the Protocol Berg and Dapcon events. We'll be sharing more over on the ZK Hack channels in the lead up to that. So I think that wraps up all the upcoming events. Hope to see you at some of these.


Now, here's our episode with Andrew and Vivek from Cursive


Today, Nico and I are here with Vivek and Andrew from Cursive. Welcome both of you to the show.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [03:30] Excited to be here.


Andrew Lu [03:31] Longtime ZK podcast fanboy.


Anna Rose [03:34] Oh, I'm so glad. Nico, thanks for joining.


Nico Mohnblatt [03:37] Hello. Hello.


Anna Rose [03:38] This episode is a long time coming. We have actually been trying to schedule it for the last two months or so. Nico, you and I, we did an episode back in October where we talked a little bit about some of the Cursive activations and experiments. And then in our end-of-year episode we also mentioned what you guys had been up to. So yeah, it's so good to have you on so we can actually dig into all of these events that you've been present at, and what you're thinking in terms of using programmable cryptography in the real world.


So let's kick off with a little backstory on the two of you. Where did you get your start? What got you excited about this? And maybe at what point did your path start to merge? Vivek, let's start with you.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [04:22] Yeah. So back in 2016 was the first time I started doing cryptography work. I was part of this research program at MIT where I was paired with some grad students to work on computer science projects, and they just randomly slotted me into cryptography. And yeah, I started out doing some stuff with consensus alternatives like proof of space, so very crypto economic, but involved cryptography, Merkle trees. And then I did some authenticated dictionary work with Alin Tomescu, who I think has actually been a guest on the show as well.


Anna Rose [04:58] Oh, yeah.


Nico Mohnblatt [04:58]  Yep.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [04:59] So we worked together for 2, 3 years using KZG commitments for authenticated dictionaries, and then kind of just dropped off cryptography for a while because I kind of thought, I don't want to be an academic, and everything in industry seems like it's weird crypto scams or something. It was during NFT craze, and I briefly interned at a crypto trading firm, and I was like, this is degeneracy. I don't want to do this.


Anna Rose [05:27] Crypto is scary and weird. That is true.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [05:30] Absolutely. And back then, it was like --


Nico Mohnblatt [05:31] I had the exact same process when I  --


Vivek Bhupatiraju [05:33] Amazing.


Nico Mohnblatt [05:35] Yeah, studied cryptography, and then I was like, I can't get into all this crypto scam nonsense. Like, I have to work somewhere else.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [05:41] No, exactly. And then I did machine learning research for a few years at MIT. And then near the end of graduation, one of my best friends, Ayush, who's also been a guest on the show, he's good friends with Brian Gu, the founder of 0xPARC. I think they go back to like high school. And he told me they were spinning up this new lab, they're doing this weird ZK thing, and I was like, what is this? Like it's probably another crypto scam.


And then I started reading the Vitalik blog posts and I was like, oh my God, this is like KZG commitments. Like this is the same stuff I was doing, it's just like applied in a different way. And so, I basically started with them in like late 2021, early 2022, doing some initial experiments around Anonymous Speech.


Anna Rose [06:24] Nice. So that was 0xPARC. What were you -- I mean, were you helping out? Did you join them as an employee or were you just kind of learning along? Were you kind of a resident? I actually don't know how it was structured back then.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [06:37] Early on, I think it was structured very similar to PSE, in that it was essentially giving out a bunch of grants. A lot of them were like Brian's ideas for various projects he wanted to see, including the stuff that I was working on. Like Anonymous Speech was something that he was championing for a while. So I was just a grantee there for about a year, and then I was briefly a full-time employee working on Zupass.


Anna Rose [07:04] Were you there during the Dark Forest era or did you join after that?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [07:08] No, I was not. I knew it was happening. I'd known Brian from some other programs, and I knew they were working on it, but I was not involved with Dark Forest.


Anna Rose [07:17] Okay. And what about you Andrew, how did you get your start?


Andrew Lu [07:20] I guess I had a less involved past with cryptography. I never studied cryptography in college, but one of my friends from doing math together kind of reminded me that programmable cryptography existed. He's basically like, oh, this ZK thing is really cool. You should go check it out. And I was completely fascinated. This was maybe in 2023 in springtime.


Anna Rose [07:49] Okay. Yeah.


Andrew Lu [07:49] So quite recent, actually. And I got into it purely from the math side. I was like, this is completely magical. The idea that you can prove things without revealing any extra information is completely absurd, and it makes no sense. And the fact that it's just built on algebraic objects and numbers is incredible. So that's kind of what drew me in at the beginning.


And after a little while I was like, okay, this is really cool. I want to work on this for a little while. Let me go meet some people in the space.


First, I joined a PSE project for a few months, working on identity wallets for a bit based on zero knowledge proofs. And then afterwards, I went to meet a bunch of people who were working in ZK. I met Lakshman from Personae. I don't know if he's been on the show, but Lakshman --


Anna Rose [08:41] I don't think so.


Andrew Lu [08:43] And I had a conversation where we were talking about how ZK enables people to express themselves differently, how it can be connected to identity in the physical world. One cool concept we toyed around with was the idea of being able to change an outfit or wear different pieces of clothing and basically become a different person, have different identity personas.


And from that, Lakshman was like, okay, I know someone else who has similar thoughts or is thinking in similar directions. And that's when he introduced me to Vivek, and we've been working together since then.


Anna Rose [09:17] Oh, cool. Vivek, you were doing Zupass. You sort of just mentioned that.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [09:22] Yeah.


Anna Rose [09:22] This is Zuzalu Zupass.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [09:24] Yep, same one.


Anna Rose [09:25] So I guess, did you guys meet after that?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [09:27] Yeah. So I was working on the Zupass team. And actually I think where Cursive like properly started was at Zuzalu. So there I met Rachel, who's currently one of the co-founders and our head of design. She had been working at PSE for a few years, helping with design for a bunch of projects there. And I also met Althea, who was a core member of our team during the early stages. Also kind of a design and comms background.


And so, like it was near the end of Zuzalu where we all kind of met and built out kind of an initial NFC experiment using signatures and NFC cards, which we can get more into in a bit. And then I think that was like May 2023, and I met Andrew like July 2023 over video call. I actually, when I first called Andrew, I thought he thought what we were doing was really boring. I was like, oh, I don't think I'm ever gonna talk to him again. That's unfortunate. But then he reached out again, and I was like, okay, cool, nice. Let's do something.


Anna Rose [10:28] Did you find it boring, Andrew?


Andrew Lu [10:30] No, no. I thought it was awesome. Otherwise, I probably would not have reached out again. That's hilarious. I didn't know that.


Anna Rose [10:38] Cool.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [10:38] You also had long hair. I never actually saw long hair Andrew in person. I just saw it over that one --


Anna Rose [10:42] Oh, wow.


Andrew Lu [10:42] I did have really long hair.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [10:43] On video call.


Andrew Lu [10:44] There's very few people in the ZK space who have seen that rare version.


Anna Rose [10:49] Before we dive into Cursive, because that's kind of what I want to cover primarily in this episode, Cursive and the experiments you've run, I don't know if we've ever talked about Zupass on the show, and it might be worth it to talk a little bit about what that was. Because yeah, this is -- like at Zuzalu, that two month pop-up city, kind of the first one that prompted -- I mean, since then, there's been lots of variations, and I think there's new Zuzalus in different places. But there was this Zupass. So maybe tell us a little bit about what that was.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [11:21] Yeah, definitely. So I was one of the first two devs on the team, and I was there for sort of like roughly the founding of it. I would not call myself a founder, but I was basically just hanging out with Brian around the time when he was coming up with the concept for Zupass. And he was like, do you want to work on this? And I was like yeah, let's do it.


And I mean, I would say it's basically an identity wallet that I think its innovation, as far as I can understand, is like they targeted a specific in-person event, and also one that was very friendly to trying out new technologies. Yeah, we're able to sort of digitize a bunch of various tickets that were involved with events, and other kind of data for citizens of Zuzalu, or other sort of pop-up cities.


Yeah. And I think in the past year and a half, I haven't followed their work super closely, so I'm probably missing some details, but I think there's been a bunch of innovations on data format and ways of using Zupass more easily as a developer. So they're just continuing to, I think, make it easier to use ZK kind of friendly data and develop with it.


Anna Rose [12:33] Yeah. I think I had it. I mean, it was kind of used as, I think you actually needed to get it for your initial ticket to get in or something. I mean, I think there's maybe ways around it, but it was pretty integrated into the experience. I also know that I lost it at some point. And then for Devconnect, you needed it again. There was a way to do that, so I was able to get it back, which I don't actually know how that worked under the hood, but.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [13:00] It's actually something that we would love to talk about more. But with a lot of this stuff that you have like true ownership over, it's actually like a very fragile system, because you need to remember -- In the case of ZK data, it's less of a signature private key, but more of an encryption private key, which is usually derived from a master password. And if you forget that, you're kind of just screwed. Like you just cannot recover your data. And so, it's pretty interesting. Like these systems can be a lot more fragile because there isn't really easy data recovery.


Nico Mohnblatt [13:31] So I guess, is this a good time to ask what is Cursive?


Anna Rose [13:34] Yeah.


Andrew Lu [13:35] Yeah. We are a team that is exploring new ways for humans to discover and deepen their connections. So we want to make experiences that align with user empowerment. We believe that users should have control of their experience. And we think programmable cryptography is a really cool toolkit for enabling this, giving users ownership of their data, giving a lot more choice over what types of frontends and applications that they might actually be able to use, enabling new ways for them to express their identity. And ultimately, this is all in the aim of connecting people and bringing them together.


Anna Rose [14:14] Is Cursive like a lab? Is it a company? Do you have a product? I feel like this is something you've actually probably heard a couple people ask. I think I might have asked you this a couple times too, but yeah, what is Cursive exactly?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [14:28] I think we're currently transitioning from closer to an R&D lab to more of just like a product team. I think we have a lot of good lessons on the research front, and like what is kind of possible and more difficult with cryptography. So I think 2025 will definitely be a very product-driven year for us.


Anna Rose [14:49] Cool.


Andrew Lu [14:50] We were in a very interesting position to begin with, because I think we had a lot of product-oriented thinking in our team, but at the same time a lot of the technologies that we wanted to explore and use simply were not ready, or were not packaged into user-facing form. And so, we had to spend a lot of time not only iterating on the product side, but also just fundamentally seeing what is possible, what can be done with these tools. So in a way we were forced to do both, but I think we took a lot of really good learnings from that.


Anna Rose [15:26] Nice.


Nico Mohnblatt [15:27] I wanted to ask, what's your approach to designing these products? I've seen a lot of teams who fall in love with the technology and say this is great, I want to use it. And I get a sense that you guys do it the other way around. Right?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [15:41] I mean, I think there's a healthy amount of that as well. Like I think Andrew and I definitely get nerd sniped, and just want to figure out new ways of using stuff. We think a lot about constraints in our process, and a lot of this is spearheaded by our head of design, Rachel. Like just creativity really, I think is easier to access when you give yourself a box to work within, instead of being like, you know, the sky's the limit.


I think one of those constraints is around human connection and data ownership. Like what are sort of the existing problems with systems that we have right now? And in what ways does cryptography help? In what ways does it make the UX bad? Like, I think we're also very honest as a team and very pragmatic. I think we understand that, like, it would be lovely to have the purist system with like a trustless or something close to that. But I think often that just needs to be balanced with what users care about, and how good the experience can be.


So I think that's been the kind of the process in the past. I think moving forward, we're looking to be a lot more user centric, just focusing on a specific persona, kind of more traditional startup stuff, given all the knowledge we've acquired on different cryptographic tech and progress that way. But that's a little bit more new, and I think is going to be like a 2025 focus.


Andrew Lu [16:57] Yeah. I think in the early stages of any new technology, if you want to be both on the cutting edge, and also things for consumers, there is sort of this dialectic between product and technology. Right? You build some things, you give it to users, you see how they feel, but at the same time you have to turn to the technology and say, oh, can we build this? And also, what else can we build? And this new thing, like, do people want that? So, I think, it's difficult in the early stages to be too much in one or the other, but slowly, that'll change.


Anna Rose [17:30] Let's do a rundown of the experiments that you did in the last year and a half or so. And then -- yeah. Because I'm really curious to see what you learned, maybe with each one. Did you do something after Zuzalu once Cursive was founded before Devconnect, or was Devconnect sort of the first time that you guys went out as Cursive?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [17:52] Actually, I think at Devconnect we weren't even properly called Cursive, but it was the same kind of --


Anna Rose [17:56] Oh, you weren't. Okay.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [17:58] -- team. I think Cursive itself was launched at Denver.


Anna Rose [18:02] Okay.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [18:03] But there was some experiments in between there. We'll just quickly run through 2023 stuff and then pass off to Andrew for 2024.


So at Zuzalu, basically we did a really simple experiment with NFC cards where there wasn't even any ZK involved, but you could basically collect kind of a private POAP, where an NFC card had its own private key, and it would produce unique signatures upon every tap.


And so, you could basically assign an NFC card to a specific event at Zuzalu, like let's say attending a town hall. And people who tapped that would essentially get this unique signature. It would be stored privately in their Zupass. And then theoretically, they could use it later to prove they attended, either just with the signature itself or using a ZK wrapper.


We didn't actually get around to doing the ZK step. It was mostly just kind of maybe more on the side of verifiable credentials than zero-knowledge proofs. But yeah, I think we just wanted to create more data for people to make ZKPs with. That was kind of the problem we identified during different workshops with Rachel and Althea, of like, yeah, this tech is cool, but no one can use it, because like there was zkEmail and TLS Notary vaguely existed, but it was too hard to use those. So you couldn't make proofs about anything.


Nico Mohnblatt [19:27] I guess it's also, on your side, laying the groundworks for what's to come next, right? Like all the infrastructure that you guys are going to reuse.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [19:34] Absolutely, yeah. Once people have a little supply of signatures, you can start to do a lot more fun stuff with that. Yeah, so that was that. And I think the next step was basically adding these signatures. And so this came around -- yeah, like late 2023, this is also when Andrew joined the team, which was an amazing level up for us. Oh my God. We were just suddenly able to do so much more because Andrew is a force of nature.


Yeah. Basically we experimented with this concept called quests, which is basically like a user-friendly wrapper of ZK proofs. So essentially, we create a quest, which was, I think the best example was like, oh, to attend this event, you need to meet like three out of five of the organizers. So the idea here being like instead of there being like a fixed invite list, it was just sort of proof of knowing the people involved.


Anna Rose [20:23] Cool. 


Vivek Bhupatiraju [20:24] And instead of calling it a ZK proof, we wanted to experiment with different terminology, and wrap it better, just so, you didn't need to be a ZK person to like get it. And I think that was a really fun experiment. I think we did a lot of interesting things, like event invites and scavenger hunts. And we also iterated this at ETHDenver, just a much larger version of this in collaboration with IYK, like another NFC team.


The main takeaway from that though is that ZK felt like a little bit of a limiting toolkit in order to build full user-facing applications around, in that a lot of what you can do is roughly privacy-preserving access control. You can basically prove you meet some threshold, and then get access to something. And it turns out, this often kind of just looks like tickets or gating some online content. And I think we felt a little bit limited by having that be our only kind of cryptographic tool which led to a lot of future-facing experiments at like zk11 and onwards.


Anna Rose [21:26] Cool. At Devconnect, was that where you were actually doing those, like, you must know three out of five of the organizer type experiments?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [21:36] Yep. We ran a few of them for different parties and events.


Anna Rose [21:40] Cool. I was not aware, and sadly didn't go to any of these. I did not know three out of five of these organizers clearly.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [21:48] I guess so. I guess so. Yeah, we had like 200 cards produced. It was actually quite a fun sprint. We basically were able to add Baby Jubjub curves into these cards. So basically they're Java cards. So you code them with kind of jank Java, not full Java, like partial Java. And we were able to get some valid signatures going, and so we were able to build a full ZK experience around it. And yeah, there are only 200 of them, so I think it was kind of hard to get it to everybody.


Anna Rose [22:21] It's okay. I forgive. It was a big event, no worries. But it sounds cool. I'm kind of sad I missed that part. Let's fast forward then to ETHDenver 2024, because, I mean, I really got to know what you guys were doing at zk11, which was April. So just like a month or two after ETHDenver. What had you actually done at ETHDenver?


Andrew Lu [22:45] Yeah. I think two different things. I would say, the main experience that was available to every attendee was related to completing the ZK quests, proving that you met certain people, that you went to certain events, or had certain experiences, and being able to claim prizes as a result of that. But at the same time, we were also working on new experiments, specifically related to private set intersection. And this was using a BFV library in collaboration with Janmajaya, who's a longtime collaborator of ours.


And I think what we've noticed is from all these activations and all these experiments, it takes a while to take a new technology in programmable cryptography and actually be able to productionize it successfully.


So at Denver, we first played around with this BFV PSI toolkit, and Vivek spent multiple all nighters trying to get it to work, while we were building out the main app experience as well. And I think we were able to make a proof of concept, but there were still some discontinuities in the experience. And fast forward to zk11, that's when we actually were able to deploy it successfully, and it basically worked perfectly during the event.


Anna Rose [24:23] Nice.


Andrew Lu [24:24]And we've noticed, like --


Anna Rose [24:25] Yeah. It really did.


Andrew Lu [24:25] Yeah. The lessons we learned from trying to get it to work, and it struggling to work, those carried over, and eventually we did actually like do it successfully. But at the same time, at zk11, we wanted to also experiment with folding, specifically regards to being able to prove you met multiple people, each one of those being an individual proof, but being able to fold that together into some sort of Spotify-wrapped like experience for your whole zk11 journey. These were all the people I met, these were all the speakers I met, and kind of generate one big folding proof related to that.


And we didn't learn our lesson at all. Deploying technology for the first time still is a huge trouble. Specifically with regards to folding, we ran into issues with key sizes, basically having to download very large keys. And you can imagine, like trying to get, I don't know, what was it? Like 300 attendees, 400, maybe more.


Anna Rose [25:30] There's 550 at zk11..


Andrew Lu [25:33]  Okay, great. Yeah. 550 attendees to download like tens of megabytes of keys on conference --


Nico Mohnblatt [25:39] Everyone on the same Wi-Fi. Yeah.


Anna Rose [25:40] Yeah. I don't know if everyone did it in zk11. I feel like it was the first time we worked together and we did announce it at the beginning of the event, but a lot of the community weren't used to it. By zk12, I think the percentage of attendees using it was actually up.


Andrew Lu [25:55] Yeah.


Anna Rose [25:55] But, yeah. Cool.


Andrew Lu [25:55] But I do want to touch more on the PSI or private set intersection experience, because I think this was something that we learned that was actually quite successful. So, specifically what this allowed you to do is, you have a list of all the people that you've met at the conference. These are represented by their signatures. Signatures from their public keys, rather. You have a list of interests or things that you're interested in, and when you meet someone you can basically privately figure out what you have in common.


And at zk11 we found that a lot of people were really interested in trying this out. It got received pretty well at the event, and people were like, oh my God, I can actually meet someone new, connect with them instantly, and all my data stays on my device, and it's all private.


So I think that was a really good learning from that event that even something pretty small like PSI, it seems like a very simple primitive, can be quite expressive. And contrast that with heavier things like full on FHE. Like let's say you want to do FHE ML or something. This is quite complicated to run. This takes a lot of computation and a lot of memory, and it's quite impractical for a lot of day-to-day consumer experiences.


In contrast, something like PSI is already practical today. It works, it works on your mobile browser, and it can actually create new social dynamics. So I think that was a very important learning for us.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [27:25] I think one other meta point here is this is our first time trying multiparty stuff, where you took data from multiple people and did some computation. ZK is inherently a very single player endeavor. There's a verifier obviously, so it's kind of a multiparty computation. I think some people would get angry at that, but the person with private data is only -- there's only one of them. The zk11 experience opened a lot of new doors in terms of like, okay, cool, what are the new social dynamics we can explore when multiple people have private data involved?


And it's a much less explored design space than ZK. So that's one meta point. And just building off the other thing that Andrew said, I think like a repeated lesson or kind of a repeated pattern for us is like, we very ambitiously try to do some new technology at event like X. We like completely fail. It blows up. Andrew did mention, like for Denver, we tried putting in the private sector intersection, it literally broke the entire app. Mind you, we have like 12,000 NFC cards that we're giving out like in five hours.


Anna Rose [28:39] Oh my God.


Andrew Lu [28:40] It broke it, yeah, the night before.


Anna Rose [28:41] Oh, no.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [28:44] It's 2:00 a.m. It's 2:00 a.m., we were doing some last minute tests before we went to bed, and then it just totally broke everything. And so, we had to like revert the commit, clean up a bunch of stuff, test another few hours.


Andrew Lu [28:53] The moment on your face when you realize, yeah, there's no sleep for me tonight.


Nico Mohnblatt [28:58] I love the term programmable cryptography because it makes you forget how hard it is to program this stuff.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [29:03] That's -- yeah. Honestly, it's true. It makes it seem a little too easy, but I think now we have a good awareness of push to try to get it for an event. But don't be too sad if it doesn't work out. It'll probably work out for the next one. And just a word of advice that like this stuff always takes longer than you think it will. Especially, if you're the first person like actually getting into the weeds of this stuff, and trying to put it on a mobile phone or a consumer device.


Nico Mohnblatt [29:30] Yeah. It's great to see your cryptographic palette sort of expanding, but at the same time you're helping everyone else. Right? Because now that you guys have tried this, someone else can come in and try more PSI stuff.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [29:43] Yeah, totally. That's definitely. I think one of my favorite parts of the field is how open source friendly it is. Like how much of a collaboration it all feels like. We're all just kind of like one big happy family, at least, some corners.


Nico Mohnblatt [29:58] Some siblings bicker, but it's a big family.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [29:59] It's a big family. Everyone's building off each other. And I really like that. It comes in contrast to ML, for example, which is like a lot of closed source work happening, and then you see like Deepseek come out, and everyone's like, this is such a gift to mankind. It's like, well, yeah, we've just been doing that in cryptography land.


Andrew Lu [30:18] Yeah. I think in programmable cryptography, a lot of people understand that siblings might fight, but we're all fighting a much bigger battle in the grand scheme of things. Like people are either going to adopt this stuff or they're not. And it's going to take a lot of effort to make it happen. There's a lot of inertia. And so, I think it really is important for teams to collaborate and understand that either everyone wins or no one wins.


Nico Mohnblatt [30:44] There is one thing I wanted to bring back about the way you did PSI. So PSI has sort of a history and literature of being a pure two-party thing. Like you have two parties finding an intersection. And I think in your case, you guys did something quite interesting where you had a server helping users compute their PSI. Could you tell us a bit more about how that worked?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [31:05] Yeah, for sure. Essentially, what we did was probably a little bit too overpowered of a technique, but it works pretty nicely for our use case, which is multiparty FHE or threshold FHE. So what goes on here is, in this case it's two parties. So let's say me and Andrew are doing a private set intersection. We essentially together perform an initial MPC where we create a shared public key.


So between us we can see the public key, but neither of us knows the corresponding private key. It's kind of like a split between us. And so with this public key, what we can do is we can encrypt our data fully homomorphically to the shared public key. So now me and Andrew have like encrypted versions of our two sets of contacts, interests, whatever. And so now what we can do is we can run a comparison in FHE.


And usually, this is actually a very costly operation. So the nice thing here is you can offload it to a server in a way that doesn't actually leak any privacy. The server is essentially just doing a bunch of FFTs for you, and then gives you back the encrypted result. And then at the end, me and Andrew come together, and we do a decryption MPC where essentially we decrypt the result of this computation without ever actually surfacing the kind of shared private key. We just decrypt it, and thus only get the result of the computation.


And this technique works for stuff past private set intersections. You can do any computation with this method.


Nico Mohnblatt [32:40] But you relieve the user devices from the heavy workload.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [32:46] Exactly.


Nico Mohnblatt [32:47] That's what I found super interesting.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [32:49] Yeah. Like essentially, the user is just responsible for encrypting and creating this shared public key, which tend to be very light operations in general. And so, you basically do the setup and then a server just handles all the heavy lifting.


Andrew Lu [33:02] And also when we started exploring PSI, we didn't have a good sense of whether or not PSI was going to be the main thing that provided a lot of application-facing value. So I believe that a lot of the tailor-made PSI schemes are specifically useful for private set intersection. But using multiparty FHE gave us the flexibility to say, oh, maybe we can play around with different types of primitives here as well. Maybe we can expand this to different things, if they prove to be valuable.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [33:41] Yeah. I think another shout out here to Janmajaya, again without him none of this would be possible. Specifically he has a really great toolkit called Phantom Zone. It's like an MIT-licensed FHE VM, different licensing to other sort of FHE tooling and it basically is focused on this multiparty FHE techniques. So I would highly recommend any devs to check that out. Really cool library. Can definitely built some fun stuff with it.


Anna Rose [34:09] I remember when you first approached me for zk11, I want to say I was really excited about the ZK, the fact that there'd be kind of like a tool on-site. But I was also a little bit wary because in the past, long before I met you, I had sort of seen a lot of these experiments go very, very wrong in events. And when you're running an event, obviously, you're under a lot of pressure in general, you want to make sure that anything that you're bringing will add to the experience of the participants.


So I already knew you, Vivek, and I guess that maybe is why I took that chance. But I remember after the event being so happy that we had, but it really was unlike -- I really didn't know what to expect going into it. And so, obviously, when we started speaking again about zk12, I was very, very excited to work together again. I know that between zk11 and zk12, there was another experiment that you ran though. So let's talk a little bit about that Frontiers.


Andrew Lu [35:08] Yeah. I'll step in real quick and not assuage any of your fears. Maybe you didn't know this, but so quick shout out. We also worked with Jack and Ian from Mach34. They work on a bunch of ZK programmable cryptography tools as well. They helped us integrate folding into the zk11 experience, and at the end of the day, folding worked end-to-end, it just was like very poorly performing due to key sizes during the actual event. We got it working in production 20 minutes before the event started.


Anna Rose [35:48] That totally does terrify me. You never told me that.


Andrew Lu [35:52] I probably should not have told you that, but now you know.


Anna Rose [35:56] Amazing.


Andrew Lu [35:57] Things come down to the wire.


Anna Rose [35:59] Wow.


Nico Mohnblatt [36:00] One last zk11 anecdote for me is how one hour before the end, Anna realizes that not only is there like all this cool ZK and PSI functionality, there's a leaderboard.


Anna Rose [36:10] Yeah, that's true.


Nico Mohnblatt [36:11] So suddenly Anna is like, I cannot lose in my own event. So she's running around tapping everyone's cards. I think you won, right?


Anna Rose [36:19] I did win in zk11. It wasn't just that I cannot lose my own event, I think it was just that -- yeah, I realized that no one was ranking, no one was competing, and so I started to get into it.


For zk12, we did fix that by actually offering incentives and bringing back the concept of prizes which you had had at ETHDenver, and we didn't think of for zk11, but I know, yeah, let's talk about that in between experiment with Frontiers, and this hiring experiment. Because I thought of that as, like when we started talking about zk12, you were telling me about this. It was so -- I mean, it seems like such a cool use of exactly these tools that you're working with. So let's talk about that.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [37:01] Yeah. There's actually a really nice tie in here with zk11, which is that Frontiers is like a Paradigm-sponsored event. It's focused on open source Rust and Ethereum applications. And Georgios is like the main curator of that event,


Anna Rose [37:17] Oh, nice.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [37:17] And he actually first saw our technology at zk11, and that's why he reached out. He reached out on our public channel. He was like, let's do something. And then we were like, sure. Not really expecting it to go anywhere. But yeah, ended up being a really good collaboration.


And so also appreciate you, Nico, like digging a bit deeper into multiparty FHE, because that comes into play actually a lot more in this activation. So specifically we wanted to take that toolkit we were using for just private set intersection, and we wanted to expand it to a more general purpose function. And this is right around the time where Janmajaya opened up Phantom Zone as a full -- I guess not a full VM. It's closer to a circuit builder, where you could just write more general purpose multiparty FHE code.


And so, we basically were looking into matching as a core verb or core action of how can we match people together based on private information in a way that is more efficient or gets to use kind of like more data about people. And in the context of a professional event like Frontiers, we kind of stumbled into hiring as an interesting example.


I think there's two main interesting private information pieces here. The first is salary. So, as a recruiter, there's some usually upper bound of salary or ideally you want to pay somebody, and as an employee, there's some lower bound that you're willing to work for, and you'd be excited to work for. And so, discovering overlap there without having to give up that information, we thought could be really interesting. So instead of there being a lengthy negotiation, and potentially even just figuring out later in the process that this isn't going to pay the -- it just is not enough basically. You can sort of front load that without actually giving up the information.


And the second bit of privacy that I think is useful is as a job candidate, if you are already employed somewhere, but maybe are trying to figure out what else is out there, or maybe are unhappy with your job and want to start applying other places, you can't just post on LinkedIn, like I hate my job, like get me out of here. And so we were thinking, yeah, it could be interesting to basically privately attest to the fact that you're looking for new jobs, but you only get notified of jobs that kind of match your ideal circumstances.


So you can kind of like -- it's almost like manifesting in a way, you're kind of manifesting your ideal job, like the salary you want, the people you want to work with, and you're just putting it out there. And only if there is kind of a match on those characteristics do you ever get notified. And yeah, we ship this end-to-end using the same exact scheme where this sort of heavy lifting of this computation is done on a server. The users are just responsible for encrypting their data. And it was successful. I think, I got a few -- like, okay, I put in a fake application because I'm happy at Cursive, but I wanted to test out the feature, so --


Nico Mohnblatt [40:16]  Like the job market catfish.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [40:18] I think -- exactly. Which actually raises an interesting point around verifiability that we can get into. But for now, I basically put myself as the ideal candidate willing to work for 10,000 a year, willing to work 60 hours a week. You know, just the most ridiculous ends of each of these spectrums. So I could ensure some matches. Yeah, I got some job offers, or not offers, but like some things that matched. And so, that was a really fun experiment, I think, exploring what you could do with a bit more than just like --


Anna Rose [40:54] This, like you're really replacing the recruiter here too. Usually you have a "trusted third party" who has all of this information. That recruiter will know that you're looking, but your employer doesn't know. They'll know often your salary bounds, but the potential hiring company won't really know exactly what your range is. And this is sort of directly bringing the two parties together in that private way where they can find each other. That's so cool.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [41:24] Yeah. Absolutely. I think this comes up a lot in our explorations as a lot of this stuff just tends to be much more direct with the consumer, and you can cut out the middlemen. And it was interesting. There's a tension here where we talked to some of the recruiters at the event about what they thought about it, and in some ways it's like, well, you're kind of doing our job. It's like in some ways it's kind of, yeah, not synergistic, but I think one positive framing that one of the recruiters found is, actually, it's nice because someone like Georgios can just put out a private job description, and he himself can match with really good people, instead of there needing to be kind of a middleman.


And I think you can actually create an experience that's a little bit less kind of extractive or kind of -- I don't know. Like clearly, there's a bunch of recruiter sharks coming around trying to hire people. It's less of headhunting, and more just like peer-to-peer discovery of good overlap, and it can just be done directly between engineers. Yeah, it's interesting. There's positive and negative framings for recruiters.


Anna Rose [42:26] In this experience, was there also a communication feature where people could actually send something through this, or was it just the matching and then they had to kind of find each other elsewhere?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [42:36] I think we just -- once you match, you just got their Telegram or their email. Like you could just choose how you wanted to be contacted, and then you could just reach out on those platforms.


Anna Rose [42:45] Okay. But is this still like you're going up to somebody and like tapping a card? Are you connecting? Are you standing in front of the person when you realize it's a match, or is it like there's a pool of people and you're getting matched kind of willy nilly?


Andrew Lu [42:57] Yeah. In this experiment, you actually had to go up and tap people, and build your own social graph. And I think the idea there was that, if you met people in person, you would be able to talk with them, have sort of a deeper relationship, and it would be more of a warm referral. I think this relates to the question of data import, which is a big question. We spend a lot of time thinking about in our work, because a lot of these matching experiments work well when there's really rich data available about the people who are getting matched.


And so in this case, the data here is the social graph as well as the form inputs for your hiring preferences. And you can imagine that in an experiment outside of a conference, you could get this social graph through other means, be it maybe like zkEmail from your calendar invites, zkTLS from maybe your LinkedIn connections. You could find other ways to import this data. And you could also perhaps do that with job searches. You could import data about where you worked in the past, for example, and have that be filled in automatically.


And so I think being able to easily import data is a question that's very relevant to making this experience richer for matching, and it's something that we have to spend a lot of time getting the UX right because people filling out forms and having to manually meet people in person to build that social graph, that's not going to be the long-term solution. And so still an open question.


Nico Mohnblatt [44:39] And it kind of addresses the catfishing concerns, right? Like if you have verifiable sources of data.


Andrew Lu [44:45] Yeah. Definitely.


Nico Mohnblatt [44:46] I was curious, was this whole experiment still built on PSI only or did you need other primitives in there?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [44:53] Yeah. So we actually basically just wrote a full boolean circuit. Specifically, under the hood, it's using few FHEW, which kind of takes like boolean circuits as input. The main kind of new functionality we needed was a comparator, like a greater than, because we wanted to compare the recruiter salary upper bound with the candidates lower bound, and everything else ended up just being like a bunch of ANDs and ORs and stuff. Is there overlap on an experience level? Like I only want to hire people with a bachelor's or higher, and just making sure that take the and of that bit vector and the candidate's bit vector is there like overlap, basically.


Anna Rose [45:35] Cool. So I just remember when we were planning, when we were talking about the zk12 activation, we had actually thought a bit about this hiring experiment as maybe also something we could run there. We decided against it. I remember us kind of going over a few iterations of like what could we get out of this moment with these people? What can they get out of that as well? Like where would they get a kick out of this?


I think what we ended up landing on was having sort of preferences again, because in zk11, I just remember it being like number of talks and number of contacts. At zk12, we actually had something more like what are you into? What do you like? What do you not like? Or I think the question was, which of these are overrated? But people got confused on the scale. It was like, was three overrated or was one overrated? Everyone got a little bit confused how to vote for it, which led to some great conversations. I thought --


Vivek Bhupatiraju [46:35] That's on me.


Anna Rose [46:36] But, yeah, but maybe share a little bit about how this differed. What were you using for this?


Andrew Lu [46:41] I think zk12 for us was more of an ideological progression. I think, in the actual app experience, we did do more of these hot takes, finding more rich ways for people to actually connect with each other based on more meaningful data. I think what we realized is the questions you ask people and what they're responding to really matters. You want two people to be able to meet each other, and when they learn each other's preferences, actually be like, oh, that's cool, this is a conversation now. Or I'm really excited. Why do you think this?


So I think we learn a lot in that direction. But more specifically, we kind of had two new concepts that we were playing around with, which were just framings of things we had already done, specifically digital pheromones and narrowcasting, and narrowcasting also being relevant to Trinity, which was a new MPC scheme that we were looking into at the time. Maybe I can talk a little bit about digital pheromones. And Vivek, you can take narrowcasting with Trinity.


For us, we were thinking about, okay, what is actually going on here? We have this ability to match multiple people on private information, sort of build more meaningful connection through these interactions. How can we describe what is happening here? And I think what we ended up on is this idea called digital pheromones. Specifically, pheromones being these discrete chemical signals that you're constantly sending out in search of human compatibility, or a mate or whatever it might be. And digital pheromones are the digital equivalent.


So they can be applied to many different settings. It could be online dating, could be private hiring. But crucially, what ties this all together is the idea that they are private and safe. So when I have my physical pheromones, this is not something that I'm just yelling out, or screaming into public space. These are much more discrete, and these are things where, okay, when you actually interact with me, then they get surfaced in passive ways.


And I think digital pheromones is kind of a similar concept where these are all private signals, they're all based on potentially sensitive data that remains private to you. But the only time you actually realize something is going on is if you are connected with someone, or if you do meet someone that matches your signals.


And so, I think we thought this was really cool because now there's this way for people to just be walking around, going about their daily life, potentially walking around a conference or event, just doing what they are normally planning on doing, but behind the scenes, all this matching is going on, and all this compatibility and connection is being found, but none of it is explicit. None of it is being done on a big server that sees everything, for example.


Nico Mohnblatt [50:03] Yeah, this reminds me of contact tracing. When the pandemic broke out, there was sort of two worlds. There was this dystopian world where one government would put out an app that tracks everyone and knows all the interactions of every people, and there was sort of the utopian version that a lot of academics were pushing for. And it's something like this where you would disperse your scent, if you were positive you could send out a signal, and those who picked up your scent would be alerted, but privately, like only they would know. So I'm curious to see where this goes. What other sort of use cases we can find for this.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [50:39] Yeah. I think probably was the first kind of wide scale deployment of something like this. And then the hiring thing we just talked about is very much kind of also a proto version of the pheromone here, literally just being like, I want this job. I like thinking of it as basically just a private manifestation kind of. It's like you kind of put out what you want for yourself, or who you are, and where you want to be, and you can sort of just discover matches and overlap.


If this is to be something that is fully akin to natural pheromones, like chemical pheromones, I do think cryptography is the right substrate for it, in that it is very neutral, it's very peer to peer, there's no dependence on a centralized server. I think this is one of the rare things where a TEE does not kind of fully subsume it, because it, I think, does fundamentally change the nature of something like this where it's, you do have to go through some service that is providing this matching versus it being like, yeah, literally my phone is letting out signals to the people around me, or on an online platform and they can just parse it.


So yeah, I think this was a really fun kind of framing and wrapping for a lot of our technology, that made it easier to explain and think about. And we actually picked it up at DWeb, Decentralized Webcamp in California, just from some conversations there with kind of more like peer to peer, local first technology people.


Andrew Lu [52:04] Oh, another concept that you've been very excited about is this idea of local first hardware. So I think this is a great fit for digital pheromones, because these are kind of things that just need to be happening in the background and you could run it on your phone, but the problem is Apple is very restrictive about the things you can do on a phone. That is just their philosophy. I think everyone who has developed on iPhone knows this, and they are one of the most fun products to use as a user, and one of the worst companies to deal with as a developer, as many people know.


Yep, exactly. So there's limits to what you can do with an iPhone with existing devices. But I think a really cool concept is having open hardware, that somehow is connected to your sensitive data, but keeps it securely on that hardware. And you can actually walk around, maybe wearing a pendant or something, that's just constantly sending out these signals to other people, and finding compatibility that way, just in your normal day-to-day life. And so, I think, that's a very interesting area of exploration. If anyone is very knowledgeable about hardware and wants to work on this stuff, please let us know.


Anna Rose [53:27] Cool.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [53:28] So I think another concept that we introduced at zk12 was narrowcasting, which essentially is like the opposite of broadcasting. You can basically pick specific criteria that you want your message to be received by. And kind of the cryptographic version of this is that, literally, it could only be decrypted by people that fit this criteria. So witness encryption is kind of the purest version of this, but you can build something with similar affordances using a mix of ZK and MPC.


Another related result to this that we published for the first time at zk12 was a new scheme called Trinity, which was developed in-house, basically mixing garbled circuits, Plonk, and then a very recent result using KZG Witness Encryption. Really beautiful paper, would recommend people to check it out.


And one really nice affordance is that you can build something like narrowcasting really easily because it has really low rounds of interaction between, in this case, the two parties. This is like a general flaw of MPC. If you want to build apps with it, there's usually a lot of back and forth. And it's pretty annoying for an app developer to deal with, if you're trying to make a consumer app, just for the reason that people put their phones away. Literally, just once the phone goes away, it just no longer can respond to requests as easily. Like Apple exposes some things --


Nico Mohnblatt [54:54] Was this part of the motivation for your server-aided MPC model?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [54:58] Yes, absolutely. That's another place where multiparty FHE shines is, you can delegate a bunch of stuff to the server, and so you don't need to be online for those phases. But ultimately, it still has about four rounds of back and forth interaction, because now you need to send something to the server, server needs to get back to you, you need to then do this decryption. Whereas Trinity is basically just one round of interaction. I basically just send an encrypted email to somebody and they can decrypt it if they match some criteria.


And the other nice thing that Trinity adds in is, is actually verifiability of input. So this relates to Nico, what you were talking about with catfishing. This is kind of a general problem with MPC is like, if the inputs aren't verified or signed in some way, then you can basically say whatever you want, right? You can sort of discover the other person's private information by just repeatedly querying them. And so Trinity also basically adds a really clean tie between zero-knowledge proofs which can prove various properties of your input data, and a multiparty computation, which in this case is done with garbled circuits.


Anna Rose [56:07] Cool. Moving on to your next events. Andrew, you and I jumped on a call after zk12, and you were at Edge City. Were you running something similar to Zupass in Edge City? What were you working on there?


Andrew Lu [56:21] I think first off, shout out to Janine and Timour and the rest of the Edge City team for letting us do something throughout the whole month at their event. I think they were very gracious and kind and supporting all of the hitches along the way as we were developing this.


At Edge City Lanna, we built an app called Cursive Connections, and the idea was to better connect people within this specific sphere of Edge City Lanna. And so some things were similar, related to people being able to form their own social graphs from NFC tapping where everyone had a wristband. But some things were also different in that we had matching that was more specific to the Edge City community.


So one big thing at Edge City was the Tensions game. I think Timber ran that. And the Tensions game was hot takes where you could fill out your opinion on these hot takes and when you actually met someone, you would figure out whether or not you agreed on some of them, but more importantly which ones you disagreed on. And within the Edge City community this was a big topic of conversation.


And another interesting experiment we tried out at Edge City was we wanted to see if we could match people within a specific event. So we chose the Halloween Party that they were throwing, and we wanted people to be able to walk into a room, kind of upload their preferences here, and within the event, basically find who else who was there that they might be compatible with, or might want to spend more time with after the party.


Anna Rose [58:16] Like a dating app? Is that a dating matching?


Andrew Lu [58:21] I think we framed it more as a friendship finding.


Anna Rose [58:23] Okay.


Andrew Lu [58:24] But I think this could easily be --


Anna Rose [58:26] But really it was dating --


Andrew Lu [58:27] Dating app in certain contexts.


Anna Rose [58:30] Okay.


Andrew Lu [58:33] Yeah. Yeah, we're just surfacing the connection, however far that takes you.


Anna Rose [58:39] Cool.


Andrew Lu [58:40] And I think there are a few interesting takeaways here. Number one is just a very practical lesson of people don't want to take out their phones at events.


Anna Rose [58:49] Oh, yeah.


Andrew Lu [58:50] And I think this is actually what inspired some of the hardware directions as well. The idea that you can just have hardware that's just passively there, that maybe lights up when you find connection, that would make much more sense at this kind of event as opposed to people needing to check out their phones.


And another related learning, which I guess we'll talk about more, is specifically we wanted a lot of the computation to be non-interactive. So we wanted to be able to surface the matches directly within the event without people having to check their phones. And so this naturally surfaced the idea of using TEEs. Because the problem with multiparty FHE is you do have this interactive decryption step.


So we thought of this example as one where you could enter room, and you understand that the data you share within that room or within that ephemeral context, will go to secure hardware because it needs to match you non-interactively.


Nico Mohnblatt [59:53] I was curious actually, you just mentioned TEEs. So far, most of the experiments have been purely cryptographic, purely like software mathematics. We have these hardware tools. Some trust them, some don't. They kind of fulfill a lot of the functionality we'd want to use cryptography for. And so my question is, as a design team, where do you draw the line between staying in pure cryptography or reaching out for the TEEs?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:00:19] Yeah. It's actually a question that we've grappled with a lot this past year, and there's a lot of different angles to look at it from. One angle is like funding. So, we so far have been funded by Privacy & Scaling Explorations at the Ethereum Foundation with grants, and so they support programmable cryptography research. So a lot of our focus has been in that direction, because that's the community and ecosystem we've been a part of, and it's been very synergistic in that way, in that we're able to take technology that's developed in-house, and then find product facing uses of it.


And I think, as long as we're funded that way, it will always be a priority to explore this stuff. Another angle here is user first. And I think something that we have yet to identify internally, and as far as I can tell, also externally, is when people care about using the full cryptographic version of something versus something like secure hardware, ultimately, it doesn't really matter what purist cryptographers think is correct. If you're trying to build stuff for people, it just matters what they think. At least if you want people to use your stuff, if you don't care, then I guess make your perfect utopia, I guess.


And I think, ultimately, there's tradeoffs to using this stuff, and I think, there's a common phrase that comes up in cryptography circles of like, oh, it's just dependent on math. And for some reason in this world, that's cool and makes sense, but I think for a lot of people, this is just intuition, like that seems a lot less strong than just like, here's a really powerful box that can't see your things. I feel like that just clicks a bit better, or at least I could see it clicking better. And so, one thing we definitely want to clarify more in 2025, both for ourselves and for the external community is like, yeah, when do people care?


So running some experiments with TEEs, running some stuff with pure MPC, and just getting some user data on like how do you respond to the copy around this stuff? Because ultimately, an average person is not going to verify a TEE attestation, or look at the verification key for this proof. They're completely trusting you, and the sort of copy and explanation that you give them, and the sort of feeling the app elicits. So basically, my answer is to be determined what balance we're going to use for this, and we want it to just be very user-driven versus what we think is right. And yeah, excited to share with the community the findings we get there.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:02:43] Yeah. Super curious to see results.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:02:45] I think a lot of people are either committing to one because they believe in it, but I think I've seen less of a kind of like, let's try them both and see what happens.


Andrew Lu [01:02:54] Yeah. One way I've been thinking about this is in terms of the hierarchy of trust when it comes to data privacy and ownership. So you can think about the lowest level of trust a user has in an application is one where the application just makes no claims to keep your data private, and just blatantly will sell your data and everyone knows about it.


The level that comes above that is one where the application is just like, trust me bro, I know what I'm doing. I'm not gonna sell your data or anything. After that comes regulatory trust. An example here in a different topic is like licenses. Like people trust licenses because you can eventually bring someone to a court of law if they violate the license. And at the end of the day, you have trust in that system because of the regulatory mechanism that underlays it.


And then one above that, I would put secure hardware, where you maybe don't have to trust the application developer as much if they do remote attestation, if they open source their code and everything. But now you're trusting intel, you're trusting state actors to not break into this. Maybe you're trusting $150,000 microscope or whatever the cost is for that.


But then the top of that, or rather the second from the highest, is cryptography. This is like trust in math. And the real beauty of cryptography in the trust hierarchy is that you can verify it from first principles. Like Intel is closed source or SGX, TDX like, you can't go into every single layer of depth and check it yourself, but theoretically you could do the same with MPC, with FHE and actually go in, and make sure everything checks out and that your data is safe. But I do --


Nico Mohnblatt [01:04:49] Yeah. First principles plus a few degrees. But yes.


Andrew Lu [01:04:51] Yes, yes. Yeah. The more practical framing is that you trust a bunch of smart people with a lot of degrees to actually go in there and verify this and tell you, hey, it's good. Which is also why cryptography really just has to be paired with open source. If you can't go in and verify it, it kind of makes no sense to begin with. But there is like a sneaky -- I don't know, it technically belongs in the top of the hierarchy, but it's somewhat restricted to a certain design space which is just local first. You can think about this in terms of LLMs processing your data.


If an LLM wants to process your data, and it's running entirely on your machine, that is arguably the highest level of trust. You can just turn your computer offline, and you can just run everything locally and that's great. But that's restricted to single player applications. Like once you want to get into multiparty computation, then you have to do either cryptography or secure hardware.


So I do think, like the big open question from a user first perspective is what applications are best fit for which level of trust, and how do users actually perceive these things? And I think, to answer your question, cryptography is really important for very sensitive data. Anything that might involve medical data, anything that people really might not want to share with the server, I think that's where cryptography can really shine.


Anna Rose [01:06:19] I want to talk about the last event of the year, I think for you. I mean, if we just go back, this is -- I mean 2024 sounds like it was just a marathon of events and activations for the two of you, for the group. But let's talk a little bit about Devcon, and what you did there. There's like an art gallery. I remember you telling me about this before you did it. How did it go?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:06:38] Yeah. Main new technical thing we did was collaboration with yet another guest on this show, the folks from Taceo, to essentially do a coSNARK experiment. It's actually kind of a iteration of the ZK wrapped kind of in a way where essentially we wanted people to be able to prove to us that they'd hit some number of taps or connections at the event, again using NFC cards and this sort of thing to produce signatures. And we had a little prize store again. It was like NFC rings, we had like NFC bucket hats, we had bracelets, we had the whole -- like the whole lineup.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:07:15] NFC bucket hats. I've never heard that.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:07:17] NFC bucket hats. Yeah, yeah. I think I have one somewhere. I got one of the last ones. It's just an NFC, like a cloth resistant NFC tag behind a label. It's actually really nice. And also setting up that clothing line was super fun. That was a collaboration with myself and [?] Tessa, who is a contractor on our team.


Anyway, we basically wanted people to make proofs for us that they hit some number of connections, and we wanted to experiment with delegating that. Again, actually in the same vein as multiparty FHE, where you would love for less of the computation to happen on your own device, and for more of it to be kind of done somewhere else. And so, what people would do is they would take the signatures they collected, they would secret share it into three parts. And we did a fun thing where three different teams hosted the coSNARK servers.


Anna Rose [01:08:06] Cool.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:08:07] PSE hosted one of them, the PSE infra team, shout out to them. Cursive hosted one of them. I am terrible at AWS. I like messed up the deployment once or twice. So I was definitely the weakest link in the chain. But we hosted one. And then Taceo hosted one. And together there's some sort of, theoretically, we could all collude and see your signatures, but there's kind of a reputation level thing, which I think is really interesting if we're all privacy-focused teams. The chance that we do this is low, or at least it would kind of hurt our reputations if we did. And so, we basically did this whole delegated proving experiment. And it actually was oversubscribed. I think we had a few tens of thousands of proofs overall.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:08:53] Oh. Wow. Amazing


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:08:55] And there's one point where --


Andrew Lu [01:08:57] I think, almost 20,000.


Anna Rose [01:08:59]: Wow.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:09:00] Yeah. Across the whole event. And basically again, this is my fault where we were supposed to replicate the nodes so that there could be more servers making proofs. And then not only did I not do this, but also two of our nodes broke. So there's only one node on the Cursive side and then eight for PSE and Taceo. And so, we were completely bottlenecked by Cursive. And then, eventually, we fixed it and it was fine. It cleared out the queue of proofs that was waiting. But --


Andrew Lu [01:09:24] Yeah. One of the coolest things about deploying things in the real world is that you get very direct feedback loops. And the way we had set it up was that you would make these proofs to show how many people you've met, and you could get some of this NFC merch by showing these proofs. And so we realized that the infrastructure for generating coSNARKs was not working when there were tens, if not a hundred of angry people standing in front of our booth asking us why their number wasn't going up.


Anna Rose [01:10:04] Oh no.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:10:05] That was a fun day.


Anna Rose [01:10:07] I love that you put yourselves in this sort of line of fire, but it's just so -- I mean, it's also you get like the visceral feeling, I feel like after that you go back building and you really -- you take it in. You're not ignoring that feedback. I feel like it sticks with you.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:10:24] No. I think we're really motivated by that as a team. Like collecting it and also acting on it. I think, I mean, we do a lot of just like ivory tower stuff as well. It's hard not to when you're trying to figure out what to do with this technology. But we try to be on the ground as much as we can, and we really like every opportunity we get. We try to make the most of it, reflect on it heavily, and just move forward.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:10:47] I mean, that's a huge number of events just there that we covered, testifying to what you're saying.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:10:52] Yes. And -- yeah. Again, huge shout out to Taceo folks. Ais, Lukas, the other Lucas, Daniel, Roman, a bunch of amazing folks helped both with the activation, but also they just came to the booth and helped volunteer and stuff. So such lovely folks.


Andrew Lu [01:11:09] Yeah. I guess that ties into the final part of our Devcon experience, which was the Cryptographic Connections Museum that we launched in collaboration with a bunch of artists and collaborators. And the idea behind the museum was just to showcase all the work that has gone into cryptography, help educate a lot of attendees who might not know much about cryptography and its history, and also tell people what's going on in the future and what to get excited about.


And we basically got a bunch of artists and cryptographers and everything in between to showcase different pieces of work. And I think the most exciting part of the whole experience for me was that Ais had set up a display about the history of MPC. So she had all of these different fundamental papers. I remember, like the day before, I had gone to a print shop in Thailand and gotten like, literally 5-, 600 pages of papers printed of just math. And they were so confused, like what is going on here? And the whole display was just these papers and this history of MPC and a bunch of golden frames set up like an academics desk, like a coffee mug, pen, paper, all that stuff.


And throughout the event, this was super attractive to a lot of the museum guests. And two people, Jens Groth and Don Beaver, showed up and they both had their own papers, Groth16 and Beaver Triples on the table. And so, that was so exciting, seeing them walk over, get to pick up their own paper and be like, oh, my God, this is so cool. That was definitely the highlight of Devcon for me.


Anna Rose [01:13:04] Amazing.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:13:05] Nico actually was also a featured artist. Do you want to talk about the thing that we did together?


Nico Mohnblatt [01:13:11] Yeah, you guys printed out the ZK Jargon Decoder.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:13:15] Yes. Actually, it was supposed to just be a museum piece and a prize, but we actually had like three or four robberies, that was actually like --


Andrew Lu [01:13:24] They all got robbed. They all got stolen.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:13:26] Okay. Wonderful.


Andrew Lu [01:13:27] Yeah. Pretty much all of them -- I think we saved one for you. Right? I hope you have yours.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:13:32] Yes.


Andrew Lu [01:13:32] Okay. Great.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:13:33]: Amazing.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:13:33] It's right here.


Anna Rose [01:13:34] Cool.


Andrew Lu [01:13:36] Wonderful. The rest got stolen. So if you're out there listening to this, we will find you.


Anna Rose [01:13:43]: You weren't supposed to take them.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:13:44]: We know who you are.


Anna Rose [01:13:46] Whoa. Wild. Okay. So that wrapped up, I guess, 2024 for you. When I spoke to you end of the year, you did sound -- you were like, I don't want to travel anymore. Although, I think, actually Andrew, you kept traveling, but we're now 2025, beginning of the year. What's the plan? Are we going to see you doing more activations at events? Are you actually planning on doing something else? You were talking about maybe a shift more towards product. So yeah, tell us what you're thinking.


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:14:15] Yeah. I think like specific technical directions are still being figured out, but definitely, I think just in terms of process of building, I think trying to shift more to marathon mode. I think last year was definitely a lot of sprints of like something comes up, it aligns enough with our directions, and I think we were just really in deep need of like data. We just needed to try things with people who weren't already pilled. Sometimes at a conference like ZK Summit, it's actually good to try it with people who are pilled just to educate more than necessarily get user data. But something like Devcon leans much from the other direction.


And I think this year, probably still we'll do some events and conferences, just because they're convenient and we have good connections with them, but I think building products for specific personas, and just trying to grow within the cities that we live in, and just try to get further and further away from ZK Ethereum land. Because I think the sort of confounding factor in our space, which is both a blessing and a curse, is that people are down to try technology for technology's sake. Like they're like, oh cool thing in the tech, let me try it, versus like this does something good for me. And most people operate entirely in the latter camp of like, oh my God, I don't want to have another app on my phone. I just only want it if it's going to add to my life.


So it's a little bit high level, but just I think trying to get more feedback loops from people very outside of the space and more targeted at specific people. Like one example that comes to mind is like professional apps entirely. So at people who are like LinkedIn power users or something, like how can we make their hiring job search experience even better? And just trying to build a very focused application around that is one example. I don't know if we'll end up doing that, but.


Anna Rose [01:16:01] Cool. Are you looking for the product, the singular product that you do end up building? Is that sort of what a lot of this was headed towards? Or do you actually see yourself having a suite of different, just more built out products?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:16:16] I mean, we'll see. I'm excited to check back in like six months and let you know. But because we are in more of a consumer and social area, I think what tends to be the right process in this space is lots of shots on goal, and you see what sticks and then go deeper with that. So I have a sense that that's going to be at least the short-term strategy is just building out lots of stuff, giving it an earnest experiment, and then trying to have a conclusive yes or no, and just continue, and understanding that most of them will be nos. And that is just kind of how it is.


Anna Rose [01:16:50] Cool. I can't wait to see what comes out of this. I'm so excited for Cursive, actually. I really liked the approach from the start and I want to see what next year brings.


Andrew Lu [01:17:04] Yeah, totally. And on the flip side, we're also always looking to collaborate with other teams on MPC, FHE research, any sort of technical research that might align with these directions. We've had many successful collaborations in the past with different teams, be it PSE, Gauss, zkEmail, a bunch of people doing really good work in the space. So if you are doing any technical explorations and you want to maybe see it integrated into applications, user-facing products, please do reach out to us.


Anna Rose [01:17:37] Are you worried at all about like some of the patent stuff in the FHE world? Like, does that stress you out? Because you're touching FHE a lot and I'm just wondering like, are any of the libraries you're actually using potentially at risk because of the more extreme patenting and less open source nature of at least the way FHE seems to be developing?


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:17:57] I think for the time being actually like multiparty FHE is no longer a key part of our toolkit. Just like right now there's a little bit of -- there's a few bottlenecks. In particular, public key sizes are very large, it's a little bit slow, it's a little bit hard to use, and I don't foresee that changing in the near future, or at least we have a lot of other options that we have to explore more fully before we come back to it. So it isn't directly affecting us. We were talking earlier about how lovely it is that we're a big family, and this feels like a certain warring faction just decided to leave and make things harder.


And I hope they turn that around. As Andrew said, there's an understanding that we're not fighting each other, we're fighting like the rapidly encroaching centralized, zero privacy-based world. And that's who we need to be focused against and not against each other. So it's easy to say that in theory, but I understand if you're trying to run a business, it can be easier to be like zero sum. I don't know.


Andrew Lu [01:18:56] Yeah. I do think this is a question of long-term trajectory. If you want developers to come to your ecosystem, if you want people to build upon the crypto systems you are building, I think open source is pretty imperative to that. Now, I don't claim to know the specifics about the licenses and the tradeoffs there, and what it means for business, but I do think generally speaking, the more open the better, at least in this early stage of development. Because the question is not which FHE system is going to win. It's whether FHE even stands a chance in the first place.


Anna Rose [01:19:37] Yeah. Good call. Well, thank you both for coming on the show, sharing with us the journey of Cursive, all of the activations and experiments and the direction you see yourselves going. Thanks for being here.


Andrew Lu [01:19:50] Thank you. 


Vivek Bhupatiraju [01:19:49] Thank you. And also thanks for the two spotlights at zk11 and 12. Like that's been so great for us. And also just to, I think, build awareness and education for this technology has been inspiring for us. It's really cool to see what cryptographers think of this.


Anna Rose [01:20:05] Cool. Thanks, Nico, for joining this one.


Nico Mohnblatt [01:20:08] Thanks for having me on.


Anna Rose [01:20:09] And I want to say a big thank you to the podcast team Rachel, Henrik and Tanya. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.