Anna Rose (00:00:05):
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.

(00:00:27):
This week, Josh Cincinnati and I chat with Matt Green, a cryptographer and professor at Johns Hopkins University. In this far-reaching conversation, we cover his early ZK blockchain research, the founding of Zcash, the growth in the ZK space, and how this space is ready for tangible real world use cases. We also talk about navigating the desire for anonymity and the existing regulatory bodies. We talk about his new project Sealance and then dive into his take on the Tornado Cash sanctions and what this means for development in the ZK space. Now, before we start in, I want to announce and invite you to join us for the upcoming ZK Hack III, a virtual multi-week event starting on November 22nd. It's all online so you can join from wherever you are. Now ZK Hack is a very special event. It's a combination of a multi-week series of workshops from the best teams in ZK, as well as a puzzle hacking competition happening at the same time.

(00:01:22):
So on the workshop front, we have teams like Aztec, RISC Zero, Aleo, Anoma, Scroll, Mina, and more presenting. These workshops are designed to onboard and show developers how they can start working with ZK-DSLs platforms, tools, and the tech. Each workshop is different, so have a look at our schedule and sign up for the events that are most interesting for you. Now, while the workshops are designed for all levels of learning, including beginner and intermediate, we also at the same time have something for the experts or the folks who really want to challenge themselves. And that is the zkPuzzles. Every week we release one of these puzzles. That is a broken ZK system or protocol. If you find the bug, submit an answer as quickly as you can, you might rank on our leaderboard. We will have three of these for this edition and the top ranking hackers will get prizes, spotlights, and lots and lots of cred within our community and even if you're not an expert, you might want to give it a shot. So keep your eye on Twitter and our Discord, and I'm gonna add links to our first kickoff event in the show notes. So I hope to see you there. Now Tanya will share a little bit about this week's sponsor.

Tanya (00:02:28):
Today's episode is sponsored by Aave. Aave Grants is a community led grants program focused on growing a thriving ecosystem of contributors within Aave by funding ideas, projects, and events that benefit the protocol and the surrounding ecosystem. Aave's latest deployment V3 was launched on six networks and introduces new features like isolation mode, efficiency mode, and portals. A decentralized collateral back stable coin native to Aave called GHO has also been announced. Look out for more details on the testnet and release coming soon. You can explore the protocol at aave.com and if you're building in the ecosystem, apply for a grant through aavegrants.org. That's aavegrants.org. So thanks again and now here's our episode

Anna Rose (00:03:14):
Today, Josh Cincinnati and I are here with Matt Green, a cryptographer and professor at Johns Hopkins University. He works in the fields of wireless payment and content protection with a strong focus on privacy. Welcome to the show, Matt.

Matt Green (00:03:28):
Thanks for having me.

Anna Rose (00:03:29):
So my hope with this episode is that we get to know a little bit more about your work and check in with you about the state of ZK. It's changed a lot over the last few years and the rate of change is accelerating. There's always been concerns about the regulatory response to this technology and the summer we actually saw it happening with the Tornado Cash sanctions by OFAC. So yeah, it's a great time to speak to you and I'm really excited to dive into it. But before we do that, Josh, you're gonna be co-hosting with me.

Josh Cincinnati (00:03:58):
I know

Anna Rose (00:03:59):
You've been on the show a number of times, but I feel like we do need to hear a little bit of an update from you. Yeah,

Josh Cincinnati (00:04:03):
Yeah because it's been a minute since I've been last on

Anna Rose (00:04:06):
Wait, was the last time you were on actually New Year's?

Josh Cincinnati (00:04:09):
Yeah. Yeah, it's been a while and 2022 is almost over, which doesn't make any sense too but

Anna Rose (00:04:14):
Well, I'm very glad that you're back on and tell us what have you been up to? What's new?

Josh Cincinnati (00:04:19):
Yeah, the biggest news for me is that I am back full time in the cryptocurrency industry. I've started another organization called Radiant Commons, which is focused actually on a project whose founder you had on an episode a little while back. The project is Penumbra and the founders Henry de Valence. He and I actually met through our work in Zcash and so I'm really excited about it. It's another opportunity to contribute to the privacy space and cryptocurrency, which as Matt knows, is definitely something that is near and dear to my heart as well as his. So yeah, I'm really excited about that. That's a big passion in what draws me to this space but my side hobby of sh*t posting got a bit of a boost because I finally have a personal newsletter and this is just through RSS and my own website that I'm hosting. But I do a little bit of narrating some fun articles that I write. Actually, the last thing I did was a little different. I interviewed my dad and tried to explain cryptocurrency and Penumbra to him and I failed. But it was a fun time so

Anna Rose (00:05:29):
Is Josh's Dumb Voice ever coming back?

Josh Cincinnati (00:05:33):
I think that's the spiritual successor to Josh's Dumb Voice.

Anna Rose (00:05:36):
Cool.

Josh Cincinnati (00:05:36):
Yeah, it's like Josh's Dumb Voice: The Extended Cut.

Anna Rose (00:05:40):
Fantastic. Josh, thanks so much for that. And congrats.

Josh Cincinnati (00:05:43):
Thanks. Yeah, yeah, it's great. It's great to be back

Anna Rose (00:05:45):
And everone should be looking out for Radiant Comments

Josh Cincinnati (00:05:49):
Radiant Comments and then my little newsletter thing is called Bit Banter.

Anna Rose (00:05:53):
Nice. Cool. So Matt, I am so excited that you're actually on the show. I don't know if you know this. I've tried to get you on the show through a number of different channels and this is the first time that it worked. So I'm really excited to hear about all of your work.

Josh Cincinnati (00:06:09):
And I'm excited too because Matt and I used to talk much more frequently when I was at the Zcash Foundation and it's really been a minute since I've had an opportunity to hear what he's been up to. So it's really cool too.

Matt Green (00:06:22):
Every few months I've been like, hey, maybe Josh is gonna come back in and do something and here's this thing you could do and I talked to him and he is not quite yet, not quite yet. So I'm glad that you're back in the world.

Josh Cincinnati (00:06:32):
Thanks.

Anna Rose (00:06:34):
So Matt, I want to kind of start, since it's the first time we're meeting, I want to hear a little bit about what got you first excited about cryptography.

Matt Green (00:06:42):
Yeah, I have a weird background. I actually started out way back in college. I actually got a music degree in electronic music and I wanted to do anything but be a computer scientist. And electronic music is, electronic music is still computer science, so it's not that far away. But I desperately wanted to be a composer and it turned out that I wasn't talented. So what I learned is that I, computers drew me, no, it's okay. Computers drew me back in and I actually ended up for a few years working on this kind of perfect job AT&T Labs where I was working on basically selling music over the internet. And the part of selling the music over the internet that got me really excited was this whole part where the music had to be encrypted and we had to make it so that you know, could keep people from buying the same song twice. Which when you look back,

Anna Rose (00:07:31):
DRM

Matt Green (00:07:32):
DRM, I know

Anna Rose (00:07:33):
I remember! Little fun fact, Matt, I actually did a minor in music technology. That was the only technology actually I ever studied. I mean, I think it might be around the same era. Are you talking early 2000s?

Matt Green (00:07:44):
Early 2000s. Yep.

Anna Rose (00:07:45):
Yeah, DRM technology, I remember this.

Matt Green (00:07:49):
It was the cool, I mean, okay, DRM itself is awful and I've dealt with it for years and it's like a dead area. It's stupid, but it was the technology itself, I just kind of fell in love with it and it wasn't so much the DRM tech, it was the fact that you could do all these amazing things with cryptography that would allow you to do all kinds of stuff. For example, transact online in ways that didn't require you to trust people or didn't require you to tell people what you were doing and who you were doing it with. And I thought that was amazing and it just kind of addicted me and from that moment on, I knew that was what I wanted to do for the rest of my life and I kind of eventually had the chance to go back to grad school and study that. And the rest is a very, very long story. But that's pretty much the end of the simple part.

Anna Rose (00:08:33):
So you're a professor at John's Hopkins. Are you a professor of cryptography now?

Matt Green (00:08:39):
I am, well mean Professor of Computer Science. I work in the Information Security Institute and I work on applied cryptography and I like to say I work on applied cryptography and computer security because I think that cryptography is a field of making computers do things securely. It's not just theory. And so I really, I don't like to give up that part of it, but that is what I do. Yes.

Anna Rose (00:09:01):
From that time of studying, have you always stayed in academia or have you kind of ventured in and out?

Matt Green (00:09:06):
No, it's pretty weird. So in grad school, I mean it's a long story, but in grad school I actually dropped out for a little while. I took a leave of absence and I founded a company and we went to work basically we did security evaluation for a whole bunch of Fortune 100 companies and we went and hired a bunch of hackers. I worked with this guy Charlie Miller, who's a pretty famous iPhone hacker and we did the first vulnerability in the iPhone and we worked for all these different DRM companies and some other really interesting kind of stuff that I can't talk about and I really loved that. I loved learning about product, I loved learning about how real systems worked in the world and I liked that part almost as much as I liked doing research. But the thing that excited me was tying that research work where we could do new things to this real world of actual stuff that human beings can use and so that ended up kind of driving the research that I did instead of writing theory papers, which honestly I wouldn't have been the best at anyway, I found that I had this niche where figuring out how to make real things do new stuff was what got me excited. And so then I went back to eventually took a teaching job a few years later and wound up where I am now, but they're with a few different interludes along the way.

Josh Cincinnati (00:10:19):
How did that evolve into finding Bitcoin and then the work on Zerocoin and Zerocash that led to us working together actually?

Matt Green (00:10:30):
Yeah. So I think it was about 2011 and colleague of mine, Steve Weiss wrote me and said, hey, there's this new thing called Bitcoin. Have you heard of this? And I did some research on it. I said, there's no way this could possibly work. And after spending two weeks looking at the design and the whitepaper and the code, I kind of grudgingly accepted that yes, it seemed to work and I couldn't find a problem with it. But the problem I found with it, I mean not just me, but the problem I saw was it had no privacy. This idea that you're gonna write every single transaction you make onto a public ledger that's shared by everybody else. And sure you're not using your name, you're using a wallet address or a pseudonym but that's nonsense. And everybody who's studied this area of transaction anonymity knows that that does not work.

(00:11:17):
And now they're multibillion dollar companies today proving to us that it doesn't work. But back then, you know, you had to make that argument. So anyway along with my grad students Christina Garmin and Ian Meyers, we spent a bunch of time thinking about how do we fix this problem? And I remember it was actually Ian who had the kind of big insight and we wrote this paper called Zerocoin, which in retrospect is kind of a stupid name. But basically it was the first, it was the academic private currency. And then later we met up with some other really smart people who were working at MIT at that time. And we basically put together this project to do this thing called Zerocash, which became Zcash. And ultimately I think is the basis of a lot of these modern privacy systems like Aztec and Tornado Cash, I think even Penumbra, a lot of different things that you knows really exciting to get to just build that and deploy it.

Anna Rose (00:12:11):
Was this the first time that you had zero knowledge proofs in blockchain in a single kind of paper?

Matt Green (00:12:19):
Yeah, I think so. Mean this is way back, this is like 2013, which I guess doesn't seem like that long ago. But in blockchain land was really, really long ago. I mean Ethereum wasn't even a thing back then. So really, people did not believe it could work. And that zero knowledge proof technology, these things called zkSNARKS were just kind of coming along. And the paper that was the paper that we based some of the zero knowledge technology on was called Nearly Practical Zero Knowledge Argument. So just to give you a sense, even the cryptographers didn't believe in and it was practical. And I think that was this huge watershed where, wait a second, for the first time, this crazy advanced cryptography, this moon math is actually being used by real people out in the world and that it doesn't happen amazing every day in crypto. So it was really fun to do that.

Anna Rose (00:13:07):
That's so cool. So had you been super aware of the zero knowledge proof work or was it actually for this project that it was kind of brought to your attention?

Matt Green (00:13:15):
Oh no. I mean I have been aware of this. I worked on privacy preserving protocols all the way through since grad school. I worked on really boring stuff. How do you download files without people knowing what files you download? So you have to develop zero knowledge proofs for that. I've been in love with eCash, although I didn't really have any great new ideas on eCash because it seemed like before Bitcoin eCash was kind of a dead area because it was very centralized and you had to get a bank to do it. So zero knowledge proofs were a huge, huge thing for me. There was this new technology that was much smaller and faster called zkSNARKs and the idea that we could just plop these things together. And for me, and I'm just to be a boring the scientist thing, the area that I work in was not necessarily making better zero knowledge proofs for me, the area that I work on is building protocols that use zero knowledge. And the analogy here is imagine your car manufacturer and there's a company that builds awesome fuel injection systems or great power windows. I don't want to dismiss zero knowledge as just being that, but for me the exciting part is building the car and the underlying technologies and figuring out how to put them all together. To me that's very exciting and there are other people who are brilliant at kicking forward the exact design of new zero knowledge proof systems. That's not the area that I usually specialize in.

Anna Rose (00:14:30):
That's interesting you say that because I mean having now been interviewing people on this topic for many, many years, for me I'm so excited that we're getting into that space of use cases because that's where I can I start to brainstorm. I can be a bit more creative before that it's been just understanding what researchers who are super deep in it are doing. Do you also feel like it's just taken a while before we can even have those ideas and have those brainstorm? Or do you think the ideas have already been created just theoretically?

Matt Green (00:15:01):
No, I think we're just on the verge of a huge kind of revolution in the number of ideas, I mean the analogy that I would give is right now the most boring thing in computer science is microprocessors. You don't think about the chip that's inside your computer. You don't think about the arm chip or the intel chip or whatever it is because there's a whole industry that just sits around all day and makes better and faster chips every year, every 18 months your chip's gonna get faster and you're gonna buy a new MacBook if you can afford it or every few years or whatever. You don't think about that. But now what people are excited about is writing software that does stuff and building social networks and doing all that stuff on top of those chips and that's good. It's healthy. The minute zero knowledge becomes boring, that's when we can start to do stuff that's exciting.

Anna Rose (00:15:44):
Nice. So I want to go back to where we were in your story. Zerocoin, Zerocash. What did you do with that? What happened after that point?

Matt Green (00:15:54):
So we wrote an academic paper. It was with a group of photographers, great folks Eli Bin-Sasson is the founder of Starkware. So he's gone on to do a bunch of stuff around other folks, start naming everyone here. We wrote this paper and it was an academic paper, but we made a decision that we wanted to see it deployed. We wanted to see people actually use this technology and not just have it be an academic project that gets dropped. So a lot of different things happened. I spent a few minutes trying to convince people that we should put it into Dogecoin and it was actually my dream that we would convince the Dogecoin. I thought it would awesome.

Anna Rose (00:16:32):
That's amazing

Josh Cincinnati (00:16:33):
You couldn've made the real DogecoinDark, not that Verge nonsense.

Matt Green (00:16:37):
Yes. No, there was this very clear moment when I would've done this, but nobody bought that idea. So ultimately we wanted to do it, but we're academics, we're professors, were busy and we didn't really have anyone who could do the hard work of let's build a company, let's convince people this is not a crazy idea. And I had previously known this guy named Zooko Wilcox O'Hearn and we'd been friends, or at least we've known each other a little bit. And we started talking and he was interested, he's very excited about Bitcoin but he thought Bitcoin had some problems and I tried to convince him this is the direction you want to go, make it private. And he came back to me and he said, I thought about it. There's no way I'm doing that. Private Bitcoin, no, that's a terrible idea. And so I thought that was over.

(00:17:21):
And then he came back a couple days later he said, I've been thinking about this. And the issue for me is not privacy, it's fungibility. I don't like this idea that I'm gonna have some Bitcoin that I'm allowed to spend because it's good Bitcoin, I'm have other Bitcoin that's like bad Bitcoin. And we know this already is a thing that exists in the world cause it's not fungible. You can trace all these currencies. And so once a criminal has touched it or if it's mined cleanly, it all is different. He said, I want to have a currency where that's not possible and I think that this Zerocash thing is the way to do it. And so many years of effort, there was a company founded, there's ultimately a foundation that Josh ran for a while and the currency was launched, I don't remember the year, but it was an actual thing and went out to the world. It was a crazy time.

Anna Rose (00:18:03):
2016, 2017?

Josh Cincinnati (00:18:06):
I think 2016

Matt Green (00:18:07):
I think 2016 too. Yeah, that makes sense. But there was a lot of time before that.

Josh Cincinnati (00:18:11):
Oh yeah.

Anna Rose (00:18:11):
And it was the first, actually, I don't know if it was the actual first zero knowledge protocol. It was definitely the first to make waves that people know about

Matt Green (00:18:20):
It's sort of a tie because there's the thing that ultimately became Monero, which is called Bytecoin was out there also. And it kind of uses zero knowledge, a different kind of zero knowledge. But it was the first one that used the really advanced ZK tech. And I think it was kind of broke ground because of that

Josh Cincinnati (00:18:37):
And it's been a catalyst for all these other protocols and ideas that now use the sort of zkSNARKs successors of SNARKs in the case of STARKs or other proving systems. But I find it for something that I'm very much interested in is seeing that evolution into, I think Zcash proved that you could do it with the sort of simple peer to peer payment protocol that mirrored Bitcoin. But now you see folks like Aztec, Aleo and Penumbra and all these other protocols coming out where that it's actually tied to different kinds of economic activity. And what I'm curious about, Matt, is from your perspective, what seems to be the most fruitful path for these new protocols working with these new proving systems?

Matt Green (00:19:23):
So there's the starting point for all these blockchains was payments, Bitcoin is about payments, how do we do payments? But once you have payments, the next thing you start asking about is how do I make this programmable? And then you get Ethereum and you get smart contracts and initially the idea of smart contracts is still kind of payments, it's payments, but maybe payments with new tokens and new rules and new escrow types and DeFi. And then eventually you start to think, hey there's all kinds of other stuff I can do with these chains that is even more powerful. Maybe I can make sure that people are correctly auditing their data. Or I can do federated machine learning where I have people putting lots of data in and we're not quite there even before we get to zero knowledge because that tech isn't quite ready. But it's getting there.

(00:20:06):
And this idea that we can have these trustworthy peer to peer networks of people who can do computation for us, take it out of our hands so that if I'm a company or a person, I don't have to do it all on my own premises or have Amazon do it. There are these outsourced people who can do it. That's what smart contracts about. So I see that as being the next generation of this is how do I do really interesting outsourced computation with people that I don't have to necessarily trust. And when you have multiple people who are sharing data together and want to pool their data, and I think that's where we're gonna see the big applications. And I think it's gonna be machine learning again, which is kind of a big deal. It's gonna be,

Anna Rose (00:20:46):
zk-ml

Matt Green (00:20:47):
zk-ml is coming and as weird as it sounds, right, it's putting these technologies together, but it's coming, it's gonna happen. And there's gonna be a lot of, I think, usage of this, but still the financial applications are very important, payments and not just privacy and I should just, full disclosure, I'm involved in a company that's trying to do regulatory compliance using zk. So what we're doing is it's still just payments, but on top of that you fold in this idea that I can prove that I'm obeying some regulatory policy, but I don't have to just go out and give the government all of my data. I can just prove this without them seeing all my transactions. So I think that there are other cool things we can do as well.

Anna Rose (00:21:28):
Totally. I actually want to just bring up a recent tweet. I think it was two days ago that you sent out something about zk research being fantastic, but what you're looking for are more doing exciting things with zk. This kind of goes back to what you were saying before where maybe focusing less on just the cool new update to a SNARK under the hood, but rather now that you have these things, they're getting more efficient, they're actually becoming usable. What could you do with them? Did you get anything back from that? Did you get people actually giving you any ideas you didn't know before?

Matt Green (00:22:02):
Not really. I got a lot of people saying, Well what are your ideas? What are your ideas? I was like, well we we have to wait

Anna Rose (00:22:10):
So the main use cases that I feel like are super, and we talk about it all the time on the show, but it's ZK for privacy, ZK for scaling, you're talking ZK for compliance. The very new one is zk-ml, which is it's computation in a zero knowledge environment. I had someone on the show recently who talked about FHE who said that maybe we'd be better in an FHE environment. Maybe there's a battle to be had there about that. But yeah, What do you think?

Matt Green (00:22:36):
Well first of all, I think one of the things that tech people and cryptographers get too specific about these technologies, like oh, there's ZK and then there's multi-party computation and then there's FHE and these are three different things. Forget all that. One of the things I actually like about the blockchain world and particularly the kind of VC side of the blockchain world is when they say zero knowledge, they don't really care whether they're talking about FHE or ZK. They're not hung up on these technical distinctions. What they mean is, look, there's data and we want to compute on that data in a way that's scalable and private and that's it. I don't care if you have to use FHE to do part of it, that's just a tool for them. And I mean them in a very broad sense.

(00:23:14):
I mean ZK means this idea of computation without revealing your data and without having to give out all the computation and so that's huge. So great. I do think that we need other technology. FHE is a very powerful tech and we should be integrating that with ZK blockchains and a multi-party computation lets a whole bunch of people compute on data without any individual knowing the other people's inputs. So we need that too. These things all have to be plugged together. So that's kind of the tech stack that is not yet in existence that has to be built once that tech stack comes into existence and it's gonna happen over the next five years, what are we gonna do with it? And there are a lot of things that we can't even think about. There are a lot of processes in your life where you get audited by the IRS and you have no idea how they picked you.

(00:23:59):
And we learned recently that sometimes the way they pick you may be a little suspicious. So now we can prove that auditing was done correctly. We can prove that all kinds of randomized processes were done, honestly and processes like lottery winner choice and so on, we can do all those things in honest ways. And it doesn't have to be just weird financial stuff. It can be all kinds of different things that we do in our lives that can be done. Now, honestly and verifiably, each of these things, when I list them, it's like, oh, that's a little thing. But they add up for sure. And when you start piling these technologies on top of each other, it ends up being just a whole different way of thinking about the way we interact with computers and technology.

Anna Rose (00:24:40):
I want to throw one more use case out there, which is like zk-ID, but it also zk-ID. So it's somehow having a private identity online using zero knowledge

Matt Green (00:24:49):
Reputation

Anna Rose (00:24:49):
Reputation, but also keeping a lot of it private. But one of the things that always comes up when you talk about zk-ID, is this, the fact that you still are engaging with real world data, especially if you wanted it to be a government issued zk-ID, someone still is probably gonna give you the license that's used in the first place or the driver's license or certificate or whatever it is. That connection point between the real world and the cryptography world, are you paying attention to that? Are there any new tools maybe even that you're starting to learn about in that space?

Matt Green (00:25:23):
Yeah, no, it's a really good question. So I mean, first of all, this idea of zk-ID is not a Web3 thing. It's already happening in Web2. Google is deploying this thing called the Privacy Sandbox and this privacy pass. So the idea that Google has is they're being told by government, you can't put cookies on people's browsers anymore, if you want to advertise them, you have to stop doing that. And so they're trying to use your knowledge, very simple, zero knowledge, things called anonymous credentials to make it so that they can categorize who you are, but without knowing who you are. But if you think about Google, their identity's already assigned to you, the reason that Google sells you for free Gmail is not because they're doing you a favor and they do make some money on business customers, they're doing it because all those emails that I've gotten over the last 12 or whatever years are proof that I'm a real person and not some click fraud person.

(00:26:13):
And that to them is the value. So they want to tie that valuable identity that I've built up, that reputation I've built up, they want to tie it to this identifier they can use for advertising, but they've been told at the same time they can't do any of that. So this is billions and billions and billions of dollars of advertising revenue at stake for them. So they're building out these zk-ID systems. So to answer your question, what's the interface there between real world IDs and zero knowledge? Well, the interface isn't always as simple as my driver's license and DMV issuer, I mean IDs can be these things that you aggregate over time, right? When I started my Gmail account, I was just a person who started the Gmail account, but 10 years later, I'm a person who started a Gmail account and has sent 10 million messages or whatever it is. And so that makes me a different person and

Anna Rose (00:26:59):
Has proven that you're a person in a way, not a bot.

Matt Green (00:27:01):
I have this reputation and my reputation might be tied to my Netflix account and the other 50 accounts that are all tied to that. And these things are what makes me, I mean as weird as it is, that's what makes my ID. So a lot of these things are not as simple as just like do we trust the government to give you an ID? Although most of the time I do trust the government to give me a driver's license. It's this kind of complicated aggregation of reputation and credentials that all have to be mushed together and reasoned over in interesting ways. And that's where the hard technology problems come in, is mushing and reasoning, not just in take simple ID and turn into ZK credential and go

Josh Cincinnati (00:27:38):
It's a bit of a crazy loaded question maybe, but when thinking about that kind of technology development for companies and ecosystems that basically survive on massive surveillance of individuals online and thinking, oh, we can figure out some way to anonymize the individual while preserving that business model of some degree of massive batched surveillance, do you think that's both possible and compatible with a free society? Sorry, is there to just dump the massive

Matt Green (00:28:15):
No, no, no. I mean now you're asking that a really hard question. I have a lot of skepticism. I could go off on a long tangent about how I have a lot of skepticism about the way that big corporations are using privacy preserving technologies, not so much as a way to actually make their customers more private, but as a way to loosen up and get around legal requirements so they can get at their data. So I am a little afraid of that, that we're end up with these credible models that basically allow corporations to predict everything about what you do and the way we're gonna do it is by using "privacy preserving technologies" to get there. So that scares me, that doesn't mean that there is not a path that uses these privacy preserving technologies like ZK to get to a good place. It just means we have to not be stupid. We have to make sure that when we say we want privacy, we have our eyes on the prize of actually the goal should really be privacy. It should not just be letting companies get around regulation. And that's where human beings fall down a lot of the time and the technology isn't at fault, it's our use of it that's at fault.

Anna Rose (00:29:16):
It's so funny because I always thought of ZK privacy tech kind of positioned on the opposite side of the big data stuff. It was the antithesis to it or the reaction to it and it's interesting to hear that actually under the hood, those things are already melding and it could lead to some better privacy in a way or maybe some protections, but it could also lead to some, I don't know, getting around regulations that are barely holding our privacy at bay.

Matt Green (00:29:49):
And I think we need to understand that better. And I wish that more researchers were, more researchers and people who are not computer science researchers knew about this and were thinking about it. It's like this big thing that's about to happen to us and we're just watching it happen and not realizing.

Anna Rose (00:30:03):
I do want to also bring up the term ZK. You just said that VCs see it all in the same bucket. The amount of projects that have a sprinkle of ZK in them at this point is crazy. You just see it, a project that had nothing to do with it three months ago, have now hired a person to at least do research into that direction. I think at the recent Devcon in Bogota, there was, this is very anecdotal, but I think half the talks had some ZK mention and not to say that all of them were ZK talks or ZK projects, but do you think that it might, so one of the fears I have is it becomes blockchain in 2017, failing startups would just sprinkle some blockchain to get some attention. I hope that's not happening.

Josh Cincinnati (00:30:55):
Enterprise grade blockchain ZK

Matt Green (00:30:57):
I mean it probably is gonna happen, but all it takes is one, all it takes is one company to come through it and be really successful for it all to be fine. But yeah, there's definitely gonna be be a ZK backlash and it's gonna happen soon and then we're going to get through that and then we'll see what actually happens.

Anna Rose (00:31:13):
Cool. I want to talk about your new project and then I do want to talk a little bit about the Tornado Cash stuff. But before I actually do either of those, I think where we stopped in your story was Zcash was founded, you were part of the org, you were part of the foundation.

Matt Green (00:31:29):
I was part of the Electric Coin company, the Zero Coin Electric Coin Company was the original name of it. And part of it means that I was like on the Slack and doing some stuff and helping out and then ultimately Zucco said, hey, would you join this new foundation that I'm starting? And I said, sure, that sounds great. And then that was that.

Anna Rose (00:31:48):
Okay and you were there until just recently?

Matt Green (00:31:51):
I was, Ijust left the foundation board. I've been there for many years and it needs some new blood I think and also I'm just slammed. So I think it's really good that more people are gonna be able to be there.

Anna Rose (00:32:03):
How has the Zcash community been the trajectory of it? It was the first, but now there are a lot of ZK projects, so I'm just curious how that developed.

Matt Green (00:32:13):
So I think the things I would praise the Zcash community for and also what people criticize it for is it's a very polite, science focused community. We care a lot about doing ZK, doing security right, doing this right and not shilling and worrying too much about the price that I've always loved. I think that's a great thing about the community, but obviously a lot of people would see all of those things as criticisms. They think that the whole point of the community is to pump the price, pump the price, who cares about this technology? So that's always been kind of a split and there's just not the personality of the community. The upshot of all that is that things have come out of the Zcash community that have had huge, I think, disproportionate influence on everything else, right?

Anna Rose (00:32:53):
Sure.

Matt Green (00:32:54):
So Tornado Cash is not exactly Zcash, but it's basically a fork of the Zcash over Ethereum idea that some of the Zcash folks did at a hackathon, not a fork, it's just kind of a re-implementation and Tornado Nova is basically Zcash sapling and now there's a whole bunch of new proof techniques based on Halo. And I've been talking to some ZK startups and they're like, Yeah, we're using Halo or Halo Plus that also came out of ECC and Zcash. So I think that there's been a huge influence on the world, even if the value of Zcash hasn't pumped every possible dollar out of the world and obviously people are very unhappy about that. I understand that too.

Josh Cincinnati (00:33:34):
I remember even early on, the Electric Coin Company offered up time and resources to the Ethereum Foundation just to bootstrap their understanding of zero knowledge systems really early on that I think also, I mean that they really don't get enough I think credit and praise for doing that and being that open with the research they were working on

Matt Green (00:33:57):
There's a SNARK verifier, there's a pre-compiled in Ethereum that verifies zero knowledge proofs and that basically was just like, hey, we want to be able to validate any gas transactions and that's why Tornado Cash worked, that's why all of these different systems work. Because that was sort of lifted directly from Zcash

Anna Rose (00:34:15):
I guess getting Vitalik interested, I mean, don't know if it was Zcash itself, but definitely the scientists around Zcash got Vitalik interested quite early and then he prepared that series of intro to zkSNARKs, which was incredibly influential. I know this in my community because it's constantly cited. It's one of the first things cited when people join. They always want to see those blog posts first and that obviously was incredibly influential in Ethereum. So the community would've known about it from that point forward.

Matt Green (00:34:44):
He was really enthusiastic, mean, Vitalik is an advisor to I think ECC and he's been involved in this community from the start and he's excited about it. And I think that influence made a big deal. Also, the connection with Eli being part of Zcash and then also being part of Starkware and Starkware being tightly tied to Ethereum and all the Stark stuff, spawning other businesses. There is a direct lineage there. I don't know that we can say, hey, we take credit for it all, but there's a lineage. It's not just random stuff that happened

Anna Rose (00:35:16):
So let's talk about Sealance. Am I saying that right?

Matt Green (00:35:20):
Sealance.

Anna Rose (00:35:21):
Okay, so I guess I'm just curious, we kind of teased it, it's using zero knowledge proofs, but it's compliance related. Tell us a little bit about what it is. What's the purpose of this project?

Matt Green (00:35:34):
So for years, I mean I started back in 2016, one of the things I've been super excited about privacy and I'm kind of in the cipher punk side of privacy. My view is privacy should just be privacy and we should not worry about governments. We should just do what we want and whatever. And I'm very unhappy with the way that computers have really taken away privacy and payments and all sorts of other areas. So I'm very much a cipher punk person. But I also recognized, and I think we recognize this way back when in 2013, that there is a threat that we may end up with a world where we get either maximal privacy or we get no privacy at all, like every payment you make is recorded by the government and if we force people to choose, particularly if we force governments to choose between those two worlds, we may end up in the worst possible world.

(00:36:21):
And so one of the things we thought about was, is there a compromise? Is there a way that we can have compliance based systems where we get the privacy that you would get from cash transactions? Small value transactions are totally private, but also if somebody money launders 200 million dollars like North Korea recently did and got Tornado Cash in trouble, there is something we can do about that. We can enforce some sort of compliance or I'm not saying hunt them down necessarily, although maybe from North Korea that would be good, but I'm saying we could prevent those kind of events from taking place and so we've spent some time thinking about that, did some research. Ultimately that research we decided and we as, by the way, my partners are Eran Tromer and Shlomit Azgad-Tromer. We founded this company and we said, let's take this commercial, let's build these systems and actually launch them and so that became Sealance and I've always been a little nervous. I'm afraid that somebody is gonna accuse me of being a show for big regulation and maybe to some extent they're right but I do believe that these systems are going to exist and somebody should do them in a way that's compatible with privacy rather than having Chainalysis or somebody else, no offense, to Chainalysis, build them all and make them them look like something much, much worse and so that's been the project I've been involved in for two, three years now

Anna Rose (00:37:37):
And it sounds also time spent in the industry and learnings that have led you to want to build this particular product. It speaks to what we want to talk about next, which is the Tornado Cash sanctions in a way, the industry, the ZK industry. I definitely see a lot of different teams that they run the gamut from being very, very compliance oriented to extremely anti-government, don't want anything to do with anything compliance and Tornado, I believe lived a little bit closer to that second pole. You still think that there is a place for those projects that are not compliance? Given that you've made sort of a decision of where you want to sit and work on it. Do those projects still have a place, the ones that go really far out? Or will they just create basically animosity from the governments that'll come down with a strong fist on them and potentially kind of wreck our industry?

Matt Green (00:38:33):
Yeah. Okay. That's three different really good questions.

Anna Rose (00:38:38):
That was a little bit of a train of thought there

Matt Green (00:38:40):
Yeah, no, but you're asking the right question. So first of all, hey, we're not in mainstream adoption phase right now. There are only a few hundred thousand people actively using Ethereum right now. So this is early days when we get to a hundred million people, actively using Ethereum every day and we get to a billion people actively using Ethereum. That's the mainstream adoption case. The fact that Tornado Cash exists in this relatively small space right now does not mean that it's gonna be the same when we're into the world where Ethereum is like Facebook and we have that many people using it. So you can have systems like Tornado Cash exist, and at the same time you can say, well look, the mainstream systems, the ones that everybody and their brother is using, those systems might not have as many Tornado Cash's. So these can be just two different worlds. The mainstream and the niche things where Tornado Cash continue to exist and I like that and I hope that is the case.The second question you ask, the other question, is Tornado Cash gonna bring down the big hammer of government?

Anna Rose (00:39:45):
Well not even Tornado Cash, but things like Tornado Cash or things that maybe even push that ethos further away from the mainstream.

Josh Cincinnati (00:39:54):
I'm very, very curious to hear this response for my own professional reasons.

Matt Green (00:40:00):
I could go on a lot and say a lot of things here, but the answer is this is this thing that we're doing and it's not just Tornado Cash it's not just privacy. This thing that we're doing where we are building financial systems or payment systems that are not centralized and tightly controlled by government regulators is a really inevitable thing. It's a thing that has been held back and the thing I really wish I could convince people of, I say this thing and it's so obvious to everybody, and it sounds stupid when I say it, but it's true, which is that computers are really good at doing certain things. They're really good at drawing graphics, they're really good at making music and they're really good at browsing the web. These are natural things for computers to do and one of the things that computers are really good at doing is sending, exchanging value back and forth, making payments.

(00:40:48):
They're just naturally built for this task and yet when you look at the last 22 years or so, there has just been this emptiness when you look for companies that make it actually easy to send real payments, like cash type payments, there's been nothing before Bitcoin, there were a few centralized companies, they got their doors kicked in by government regulators and by the FBI because there were a lot of regular people who did not want that kind of business to exist and so we had what PayPal, and we had maybe Venmo that this is not a natural world, but it's not just, there are a million different companies who have tried to do social media. There are a million different companies who have made games. There are two companies who have been successful, maybe three at doing peer to peer payments. That's not normal.

(00:41:29):
That's an artificial situation and the problem is that artificial situation is not tenable. You can't keep that situation going for much longer and when you try to stop those companies that people from using computers to do things they're very good at, you end up with decentralized systems that work around those regulations and you end up with Bitcoin and you end up with Ethereum and whatever. And so anyway, I'm gonna stop talking a lot, but what I'm trying to say is these systems are hard to control and stop and they will proliferate. And it's like trying to stop, I don't want to use a bad analogy here. It's trying to stop people from buying drugs. You can put a lot of restrictions that make it hard and make it expensive, but you're never gonna get it to zero and so those systems can't go away. At the same time, we don't like drug dealers in our neighborhoods and governments don't like drug dealers. There are a lot of people in jail, and I would say arguably our country's a lot worse off because of things like the drug war and what do you do about it? I can't stop the Tornado Cashes of the world from existing. I'm not sure I would want to and they are gonna exist and the government is gonna overreact and everybody's gonna suffer in a whole bunch of different ways. And I'm not sure whose fault it is, but it's just the situation we're gonna wind up in

Anna Rose (00:42:40):
And what you said there though, that it's this inevitability, the things we've built, the internet, the computers that we use and now maybe decentralized ledgers there is sort of a way that they're developing, whether we kind of try to slow it down or control it or stomp some out it, it will still happen. But I guess do you think we philosophically need to be at a different place as a society or something? Is that what we're waiting for? Or do we have to wait for the nation states to just crumble enough that it doesn't matter anymore?

Matt Green (00:43:14):
I mean, I think by the time they crumble that much, we're gonna be all in a much worse place. So I'm not sure I want to look forward to that world, but I do think that it isn't natural. There's always been a world where it was easier to send money around, and we did that right? There was always not that long ago and we could just send cash to people and nobody cared about it or we could not every transaction you made was tightly monitored and the financial regulation wasn't quite as strict. And so it's possible to live in a world with privacy and some financial privacy and the world didn't end then and it won't end now. And it's not like all these regulations are stopping all the drug money laundering in the world from happening all the time. So I think that we could be in a much more private world. On the other hand, do I think we're gonna live in a world where there is no government regulation trying to control the flow of funds? No, I don't think that world's gonna happen in my lifetime.

Anna Rose (00:44:06):
Let's fully move on to the Tornado Cash topic. I know we've just been kind of heading there. So it happened in August. I'm really curious to hear from you, you've been in this space for a long time and that very much in the privacy focus part of the industry. What did it mean for you when you saw this? Were you kind of like, oh yeah, we knew that was coming. Or were you actually surprised with how it went down?

Matt Green (00:44:30):
You could know that something's coming and also be surprised when it goes down.

Anna Rose (00:44:34):
Okay,

Matt Green (00:44:35):
Right, it's a little bit of both. It actually surprised me. It took so long for this to happen, and it surprised me that we got away with being so lax around adding privacy to protocols for so many years. Our whole thesis in starting Zcash was, this is the way or at least doing the research was, actually when we started Zerocash, we thought that this Bitcoin, we naively thought Bitcoin would add it to their protocol. That was back in the days when people thought Bitcoin would update their protocol more often and it was only later that this whole idea of Altcoins was a thing. So anyway, the idea that all of these new systems like Ethereum and other things popped up with no built in privacy was really shocking to me.

(00:45:17):
And yet the world didn't end. We said governments are gonna take advantage of this and they're gonna filter and censor transactions. And the fact that that didn't happen for a whole eight years from the launch of Ethereum was pretty impressive. Unfortunately, if you look right now at Ethereum's proof of stake block production it is now, I think yesterday up to somewhere between 62 and 64% of all blocks produced are sanctions compliant. Meaning that they are filtering specifically for sanctions type transactions and that's a real, again, I'm not saying that Tornado Cash transactions are good or bad. I'm not trying to apply a value judgment here, but you can't have a censorship resistant protocol in that environment. And when you've gotten there, something terrible has happened and it's not good for you

Anna Rose (00:46:06):
I mean, in a lot of ways that just demonstrated the impact that a government can still have, whether it be for privacy technology or not. It could be just for anything. If there's a way that if there's addresses that they don't want to be included, now we can see that there is a way to get companies that have sort quite a bit of power to comply and I think in the proof of stake case we've done now two episodes where we talked about this, but it's like the MEV this, it's at a different place in the stack even where that compliance can actually happen. I think we always thought it would be validators/miners, right? But now it's like, oh no wait, there's like all these other actors kind of emerging who can also do it.

Josh Cincinnati (00:46:49):
And so much of that is, oh, those pieces are public and transparent to the world. It makes me, this whole thing kind of makes me think was in the eight years, that eight year interregnum where we were sort of left alone, was actually creating this complacency around the privacy piece where we all, it was almost works. I mean now don't, I'm not gonna put my tin foil hat on here, but it seems like it kind of works to the government's favor that all of a sudden there are maybe not millions or tens of millions or a hundred million, but hundreds of thousands of very active people that are now reliant on a system that doesn't have privacy baked in.

Matt Green (00:47:31):
When your adversary is screwing up, don't step in and remind them that they're making mistake and I think that's what the government, whether they were doing it consciously or it was just laziness, that's what they were doing and yeah, it's a very effective thing. Let people get locked into a system that is at a deep fundamental level broken and the scary thing about it is Ethereum strategy for adding privacy is something like Tornado Cash. They said we'll have privacy, it's gonna be inside of some smart contract. But what OFAC sanctions exposed is that they can get you right there and they can filter those transactions. And if you don't bake it into the protocol and actually actively think about censorship resistance than you're toast.

Anna Rose (00:48:12):
I think I asked this on the last episode I did with Martin where we also talked about Tornado. Do you think in a weird way that it was kind of good for the ZK community to have this happen when it did? And obviously, I just want to say something here, anyone who worked on the Tornado Cash project, obviously it's not good in a good sense, but I just mean for the health of the ZK industry, is it good that it happened?

Matt Green (00:48:41):
Yes, I think it's really helpful. I think people, you know, can only say, Hey, the bad thing's gonna happen to you so many times and not have the bad thing happen and people stop taking you seriously and so just seeing the bad thing happen exactly as predicted is really, really important. But this doesn't mean that people are gonna pay attention. There are gonna be people who maybe rightly say, well, Tornado did have a lot of crime and whatever on, and maybe we don't care about that use case. Maybe it's just one. As long as OFAC and Treasury are just doing these very isolated kinds of bands, it's okay. I think the danger there is that the same complacency you know, can wish for things to be all right, but once people have figured out how to exploit a system, they're gonna keep exploiting it more and more. And I think exploit, by the way, I work with people who talk to a lot of regulators, and I'm sure that this is gonna make a lot of people mad. I just want to use the word exploit, like a security researcher. Trying to make a system work the way you want doesn't imply a value judgment about what's happening, but it's definitely an exploit of the system.

Anna Rose (00:49:46):
Kind of going back to where, at least on this particular case, this moment, that 62%, you mentioned a lot of that, the fact that they can make a multi billion dollar network OFAC compliant, even though it's decentralized, a lot of it comes down to MEV and the tools that are used to extract MEV. Have you paid attention to that space, the MEV space and the cryptography that there because there are some cryptographic solutions that have been proposed there?

Matt Green (00:50:15):
Yeah, just a little bit. I'm aware of some, I know Penumbra is doing some of this stuff and there are other people who are working on it too. Yeah, it's a hard, ugly problem, but it does come down to a combination of probably some cryptography and some encryption, maybe zero knowledge and also just honesty. If everybody in the system wants to censor, then no crypto in the world is gonna save you but as long as there's some percentage of people who aren't, what you can do is you can leverage cryptography to make it very expensive and very kind of difficult for people to censor. And I think that's the direction that we need to go

Anna Rose (00:50:49):
I know one proposal is also this idea of just you can, the MEV as it lives today with the agents that exist today, you can kind of use cryptography to break that up, but I know there is a counter argument to that that says you can break it up, but you'll find MEV somewhere else. There can still be these centralizing points just further away from the validators or something.

Matt Green (00:51:12):
I don't believe it. I don't know. I'm on the fence, right? Yeah. I mean, as an engineer, when you see a problem like this, the instinct that I have is we have to be able to find a solution. We have to be able to not necessarily stop it, but make it so expensive to do MEV and by the way, I see MEV and censorship resistance as two sides of the same coin. One is removing transactions and one is changing the order of transactions and they're both based on looking at the transactions and having thoughts about whether you want them. So they're just the same thing and so if we solve the hard one, we solve the other one. Obviously there's some slight subtleties in those solutions, but to me, this problem is we're really good at doing things using technology where we make things exponentially more expensive for people to run attacks.

(00:51:58):
And I can't swear, but my instinct, my intuition tells me there's something we can do where we do it with five times as much resources that makes it two to the five times as hard or maybe some smaller exponential to run these attacks or more costly. So we'll never stop it. But I think we can make it much more expensive and I think we can do it in a way where the differential between the resources we have to throw at the problem and the expense of somebody overcoming it ends up being pretty asymmetric, pretty different, but I'm just spitballing. So yeah.

Josh Cincinnati (00:52:27):
Do you think that that asymetry will be enough with state level actors though? Because that's like what I wonder about. If you have this world where Ethereum's like a trillion, multi-trillion dollar ecosystem, and then the value derived from censorship at that scale is so much higher, maybe the various governments would be willing to attack what is fundamentally an asymmetric cost problem.

Matt Green (00:52:57):
And I think the much more likely outcome is what happens is that maybe Ethereum tries too hard to be decentralized, to be censorship resistant than instead think of Ethereum like Usenet. They were a decentralized system for doing messages. And then Facebook years later, Facebook is a totally centralized system and Facebook complies with all the regulations. So maybe the outcome is not so much Ethereum fails or succeeds or gets attacked, but rather that Ethereum gets forked or the version of Ethereum that is the future or the version of whatever that is,the future is not just strips out those protections because the value, the incentives that the government can offer to people who are willing to not transact that way is high and that could be the answer. So I don't know what the policy feature is. I just think at the protocol level we can individually defend protocols.

Anna Rose (00:53:50):
I do think that idea of at this stage, going in and changing Ethereum's model is gonna be really challenging. There's a lot of vested interest in the system that exists today continuing, but there are a number of other networks that are out there and gaining some mind share. Even I know there was all this battle over the L1s, the other L1s are gonna take over Ethereum and I think that narrative definitely was knocked out for a while. And I don't think it will be an L1-like Ethereum taking Ethereum, but right now it seems pretty entrenched in a weird way. The MEV, and I know there's a lot of conversation about this, there are other groups that are trying to come on. I actually believe that 62% you just shared might actually be down from what it was before.

Matt Green (00:54:37):
Good.

Anna Rose (00:54:38):
So I know that there is an effort to of reduce it. I still wonder though, there's so much vested interest. The MEV ecosystem is booming. Apparently, the other biggest talks in Bogota, I wasn't there, but the other most common theme in the talks was MEV and so yeah, it is. It's exciting to, people want to be in there. It's like there's brain share, it's really

Josh Cincinnati (00:55:01):
It pains me so much because it just sort of feels like

Anna Rose (00:55:03):
Nihilistic

Josh Cincinnati (00:55:04):
an extraction. Well, you know what it feels like to me, it's like when Chainalysis first started, and again, no offense to maybe a little bit of offense to any blockchain analytics company, I don't care. But when they started, there was excitement around that and to me, MEV is almost, and again, I haven't spent much time or space looking into it very deeply, but so much of it seems like the same kind of negative externality that the blockchain analytics space kind of engorged itself into early on in Bitcoin's life and I just sort of see this is the Ethereum arc of that same kind of behavior.

Anna Rose (00:55:44):
Oh, interesting.

Josh Cincinnati (00:55:45):
There are wonderful people that, obviously I think that the Flashbots team in particular has very good intentions and everything that I've heard about the way that they're approaching it is that they have a deep sense of mission and purpose about why they're doing the things that they're doing. But it's still on a conceptual level, it almost feels like this is Ethereum's Chainalysis arc or something.

Anna Rose (00:56:11):
Interesting.

Matt Green (00:56:12):
Yeah, I don't know. I mean, I don't know what's gonna happen. I really, really don't know the future. But I do think that if trusted systems could provide better value without MEV trusted centralized type systems, then decentralized systems or MEV is running rampant, it's gonna be a bad thing for the decentralized systems. And maybe there's some economic reason why that'll happen, but I'd like to believe that smart people will see the danger there and will steer away from it. Just to address what you just said about the entrenched ecosystem, I agree, but we've had entrenched ecosystems before. I don't want to say Bitcoin has gone away, but I think a lot of the energy in the world has shifted away from Bitcoin towards these newer, towards Ethereum. Ethereum is the new hot thing, but that doesn't mean that we're done right. There is always room for entrenched systems to become too entrenched and lose relevance. So we'll see. Yeah.

Anna Rose (00:57:04):
I think we've talked a little bit about some of the impacts of Tornado Cash, but as it happened, you are surprised that that week, I'm curious what your take was on the reaction of your peers and when it happened, people felt a lot, Twitter was on bit on fire, A lot of people had very quick hot takes. There was some misunderstanding, misinformation also going around. People made assumptions about certain things that weren't completely clear yet. Yeah. What was your take at that time on what people actually, how they reacted?

Matt Green (00:57:38):
Well, okay, so the good news was that most people were sort of like, This is bad. I like that this is bad. There were different arguments for why this is bad. I didn't feel like there was outrage. This was a very niche issue that people who were really into ZK and privacy and blockchain cared a lot about and the rest of the world was kind of like, meh. Some North Korean money launderer got shut down. So that was one thing that I noticed. I'm not sure what it would take to kick this kind of stuff out into the world, but it was a little bit less of a massive issue. The other thing that I would say is, wow, I was surprised. So I got involved in one aspect of this, which was the code. I was very, very worried and sad that Github took down Tornado Cash's code.

(00:58:22):
And my view has always been really simple. You could argue whether Tornado Cash is good or bad. That's a great argument, go have it. But the Tornado Cash code is just code. It's protected, in my opinion, by the First Amendment and it's valuable. My students need it. I need it, that code should exist. And I thought, here's the uncontroversial part. So I'll just lop off the un uncontroversial part, which is we'll just protect that code and it got taken down by the sanctions, but we'll make a mirror of it, whatever and I actually gotten a certain amount of trouble with

Josh Cincinnati (00:58:51):
Did you

Matt Green (00:58:53):
Not so much trouble. I heard thirdhand that some people were unhappy with me about that, and I was a little bit shocked. I think it was just I was surprised. I thought everybody from Treasury on down would basically say, look, we didn't mean to take down the code.

(00:59:09):
Of course the sanctions on the chain, maybe we meant that. And I think it, I accidentally without meaning to made some people like embarrassed or look bad and it was surprising to me and I guess maybe I need to grow up a little and learn that. So that was one of the reactions I heard that I was sad about. I'm not sure what else to say. I think that people have a lot of thoughts about Tornado Cash and on chain privacy should be a right and they're gonna take a lawsuit and they're gonna do it. I'm a little pessimistic. I'm not saying they're wrong. I'm just saying that I'm pessimistic that that's gonna work out for everybody

Anna Rose (00:59:47):
About the code. So I remember that tweet. I remember you saying that you were gonna do that later. When the FAQs came out, they did actually kind of say that the code was okay to use in educational things. Do you think your tweets had something to do with that being included?

Matt Green (01:00:04):
Yeah, I think so.

Anna Rose (01:00:06):
Okay. Wow.

Matt Green (01:00:06):
I mean, I don't know. Maybe not. Maybe I'm overemphasising it, but I think getting it out there was important and I think that people have to do that. And the one thing I could do as a professor who has a Twitter account that some people follow is I can make a big stink about that. And I'm really happy that, I have a large enough Twitter microphone to make a tink about things like that, that I think are important, even if I can't fix all the other problems.

Josh Cincinnati (01:00:28):
Yeah. Yeah. I'm grateful for that and frankly, I also think that whoever felt embarrassed about you posting the code should have felt embarrassed because it's a free speech issue and if,

Matt Green (01:00:42):
Yeah

Josh Cincinnati (01:00:42):
It's crazy to me that, again, actually there's a friend of mine who, a brilliant law-minded person, lawyer-type who does think tank style stuff in DC and he tried to walk through why he thinks a lot of these, the lawsuit is no-go. Why there's like a sufficient amount of leeway in the way that OFAC can actually, there's apparently an argument to be made that OFAC can in fact sanction. I intuitively feel like it's terrible, but apparently the way the law is written suggests otherwise. But I think even he would admit that the code itself is still something that should be permissible to publish and post.

Matt Green (01:01:27):
Yeah, I think these are the kind of values that we should all just say nobody should disagree about this. It is definitely protected. The code is protected, it's valuable and maybe it was just more a question of the implementation. Nobody had the intention of taking down the code. The implementation is kind of what is crazy and people are a little embarrassed about that. Nobody is necessarily disagreeing with that but yeah, we have to be more careful and a lot of these sanctions laws, the laws that enable the sanctions have specific riders that basically say, hey, there are these exceptions and they're designed to protect things like bookshops and publication, and they exist because we as a country value our first amendment and our ability for people to speak and software is no different. And that's a place where I think we need to draw a line.

Josh Cincinnati (01:02:12):
Yep.

Anna Rose (01:02:12):
Did you learn a lot about how Treasury works when this happened? I did. I'm not American, but I learned a lot about all of the different administrative units. We also did a show about that where the Treasury and OFAC and the CFTC.

Matt Green (01:02:28):
Yep, yep.

Anna Rose (01:02:29):
And the SEC and how they all relate or don't. But yeah, did you already know all this or did it actually shut some light into how they work for you?

Matt Green (01:02:38):
I didn't know as much about OFAC as I do now, but I wouldn't say I'm an expert. One of the things I'm very happy about is not being deeply attracted to being an expert on this. There are people who are great at this. I work with some of them. Peter Van Valkenburgh, who I'm sure you've all met, he's great. He's at Coin Center. He knows all the stuff by heart and he could talk to me for hours. But for me, I feel like if I know too much about that, it's gonna curse me and I'm gonna forget how to do tech or something.

Anna Rose (01:03:07):
Well, it's gonna make you worried about every single decision you're trying to make because there's all these possibilities.

Matt Green (01:03:13):
But I have had a bunch of meetings with regulators. I'm gonna say this I had a meeting with some folks at FinCen. I've had meetings with folks at Treasury and they're at digital, I guess, innovation departments. And all of these people are super nice, super intelligent, well informed about all of these areas. They're not bad guys. I just really want to make it clear that it's not just a bunch of people going around and even when I talk to some of the folks who are in the national security side, and I've talked to some of them in the administration, they have strong feelings about this and they really, really, really, probably with good reason do not like the idea that North Korea has 500 million or 600 million or got, maybe didn't get it all. And for them, this is a matter of US city not blowing up in mushroom clouds and it's very hard for me to tell those people they're wrong. So they're not totally on the wrong side there.

Anna Rose (01:04:04):
My sense when this happened on Twitter, at least, there's almost this attitude that OFAC is coming to take away your fun. They want to hurt you. That was the feeling at least, that people were reacting with everything we're doing, they're against us. It took me doing that interview where with a few lawyers who could help me navigate what was happening. That there, there's a mission, a goal, and this is one of the tools they're using to get that goal. But it's not necessarily to shut down the blockchain industry.

Matt Green (01:04:36):
If they wanted to shut down the blockchain industry, this was a scalpel and not a axe. They could have used an axe and that would've been stupid. But they used a scalpel

Anna Rose (01:04:46):
Although not perfectly

Matt Green (01:04:48):
No, but no surgery ever goes perfectly. It could have been a hundred times worse easily. Yeah.

Anna Rose (01:04:56):
What do you think comes out of this? I mean, we talked a little bit about what we hope, but going forward, what's the takeaway? What do you want to see on the horizon from the ZK community? I mean, you talked use cases. I mean, I think once you start to explore use cases, there's so many kinds of use cases, which will hopefully continue to be, I guess I hope that it doesn't stop the ability for us to brainstorm all these great use cases that we get stuck on this one use case that isn't executed correctly yet.

Matt Green (01:05:26):
So I want to see zero knowledge get baked in at the lowest level of these systems. It has to be there. It has to be part of the system and that's gonna mean payment privacy, and it's gonna mean payment privacy is gonna have to have some of these features that, again, not chilling my own thing, but regulatory compliance is gonna end up being more and more important to people, especially as privacy is out there. So that that's a thing. I want all that to exist. I want that, not just privacy technology, the zero knowledge technology to start to find new applications, and I think we're starting to see some of those. I really do believe DeFi is not stupid. A lot of people look at DeFi and they're like, oh, this is a clown show. And I know people, sorry, the people I talk to in the academic community are like, DeFi is just a bunch of people like pumping and doing all this.

(01:06:08):
It's not, I think DeFi is gonna be really, really, really important and I think there's a really compelling argument to make that DeFi will actually be a lot more efficient than centralized financial systems but I accept that I may be wrong about all that. And without privacy, without zero knowledge, none of that technology is gonna ever be able to go into the real world use cases. because you can't have MEV all over the place. You can't have everyone monitoring your transactions. It's ridiculous and so for that stuff to grow up, these technologies have to become mature. But once you get outside the obvious stuff, yeah, there is the big question. There is this huge greenfield for how are we gonna do more exciting applications? How are we gonna make it so that the Google's of the world can do that identity stuff and in a way that's private?

(01:06:52):
How can we make it so that we can handle all this data? Our phones are generating in a way that lets us do useful things, but is hopefully not abusive and is also private. And all of those things are gonna need infrastructure to grow up on and I think one of the big things we're not seeing is we're not seeing very much of that stuff deployed. Because every time somebody wants to deploy a technology like that, it requires a Google to talk to a MasterCard or something like that and that makes this much harder. Once it becomes a platform that's available like AWS, which could be a few years away, then we're gonna see applications we haven't even thought of that are gonna do huge things with data. But I can't tell you exactly what they are anymore than I could have told you exactly what was gonna happen with the internet back in the early days. Things surprised me.

Anna Rose (01:07:39):
Very cool. Matt, thank you so much for coming on the show and sharing with us your background, the work you did and the work you're doing today. And also talking to us about the Tornado Cash, OFAC sanction, the impact, what this could mean for our industry. Yeah, we covered a lot. Thanks for coming on.

Josh Cincinnati (01:07:57):
Yeah, thanks Matt.

Matt Green (01:07:58):
Yeah, thank you for having me. It's great.

Anna Rose (01:08:00):
I want to say a big thank you to the podcast team, Tanya, Rachel, and Henrik. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.

