[Anna Rose] (0:06 - 0:18)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, a podcast where we explore the latest in blockchain technology and the decentralised web. The show is hosted by me, Anna, and me, Frederik.

[Frederik] (0:24 - 0:35)
In this week's episode, Anna sits down with Jorge from Aragon to discuss his work on the project, the history of DAOs, and the challenges and potential of these new organisational entities.

[Anna Rose] (0:45 - 2:18)
Before we start, we want to say thank you to this week's sponsor, Apograph. Apograph's platform is designed to break down barriers, reward researchers, and promote open science. Institutions and for-profit publications put a high price tag on much of the world's best research, even when that research is funded by the public.

This hinders professional communication, it constrains data analysis, and it slows the rate of scientific progress as a whole. To counter this, Apograph has built an extensive collection of open access research papers on cryptography, distributed computer systems, and blockchain. If you are a researcher who'd be interested in having a profile in such a system, or if you'd like to subscribe to a specific researcher's work, please check out welcome.apograph.io. We've added the link in the show notes. So thank you again, Apograph. Now here is our interview with Jorge. So today I'm sitting with Jorge from Aragon One, and we're going to be talking a little bit about Aragon, the structure of Aragon, the Aragon courts, all sorts of cool stuff.

And I think Jorge is an amazing guest to have on to also touch on the topic sort of generally of DAOs, something we haven't really covered that much. There is one episode that we did do on the DAO with Griff Green, which I'll put in the show notes. That might be an interesting one to check out before this one.

But yeah, anyway, Jorge, welcome to the show.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (2:18 - 2:20)
Yeah, thanks for having me, Anna. Super excited.

[Anna Rose] (2:21 - 2:23)
Jorge, what are you working on?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (2:24 - 2:32)
I'm one of the co-founders of the Aragon project and currently work at Aragon One, which is one of the teams working on Aragon. Cool.

[Anna Rose] (2:33 - 2:33)
What is Aragon?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (2:34 - 3:02)
Aragon is a project that is making decentralised organisations happen. So the Aragon client is this way to create and manage decentralised organisations. But we're also working on the Aragon network that we call it, like a digital jurisdiction for DAOs in a way, which is providing sovereign DAOs with some of the services that they wouldn't get from not being a part of the traditional legal system.

[Anna Rose] (3:03 - 3:07)
Cool. I'm curious, what were you doing before this?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (3:07 - 5:06)
So before this, the reason I used to be an iOS app developer, and I had multiple jobs doing this, at some point, I stopped working for the company I was working for. And I was back in Madrid thinking about what to do next. And my co-founder, Luis, he was also moving away from his current company.

And he told me about this idea that he had for a company. And we immediately teamed up on it. And we moved over to Silicon Valley to kind of work on it and fundraise for the idea.

That idea was kind of shifted quite a bit. And we ended up building this crowdfunding platform to fight patent trolls. So if there was like, bad patents that could be used to harm companies, that you have a patent because you bought it from a company that was going bankrupt, or directly having companies that file totally stupid patents, that can then take that patent and try to extort other companies that do something barely related to what says in the patent.

So we were building a crowdfunding platform for that. And we like to take down specific patents. And we figured that, or the people that wanted to use it weren't that interested in like throwing down specific patents, because they never knew what type of patent, like what specific patent could hurt them.

And they wanted insurance. And at that point, we started playing around with the idea of building an insurance vehicle directly on Ethereum. And we went pretty down the rabbit hole.

And that was super, super interesting. But apparently, like launching an insurance vehicle has like a lot of other things. Yeah, like building, making the thing work on Ethereum was not super hard.

But then there was like a lot of other things. And at that point, we had gotten ourselves very familiar with Ethereum. And we decided to convert it into what today is Aragon and focus on that.

[Anna Rose] (5:07 - 5:12)
Okay, so now let's talk about Aragon. What year is this? What year did you start thinking about Aragon?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (5:13 - 5:15)
Yeah, this was the fall of 2016.

[Anna Rose] (5:16 - 5:20)
Okay. Did you write a whitepaper? Did you do kind of the classic?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (5:20 - 6:35)
Yeah, I mean, when we started thinking very seriously about the idea, we did some brainstorming and then Luis started writing a whitepaper. But right until actually the first whitepaper was very interesting, because more than it was kind of like a product spec in a way, it was like, we want to do this decentralised organisation of things. And what are the features that we need?

Okay, we need identity for the people here, we need a way to have shares or token management to give people interest, economic interest in the organisation, we need a way to track finances. And so it was like, okay, these are the things that we would need. But then immediately, we set out to build the product, the first prototype.

And we did that in like three months, we were to a point that we were comfortable with this, and kind of showed it to the world, we put it on on the REtheorum Reddit. And that was that was super fun. And then, like a month after that, we launched the we launched the product, the first alpha, and people were already using it.

So that original whitepaper was kind of just a, okay, this is the one, the motivation behind the idea. And this is how we can do it. And we can do it now.

[Anna Rose] (6:35 - 6:42)
But you actually proved it a little bit more with this MVP. Okay, so what, what did you do next? When, like, when did you do the sale?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (6:42 - 6:47)
The sale was in later, like, the next year, like in May.

[Anna Rose] (6:48 - 6:49)
May 2018.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (6:49 - 6:50)
2017. 2017.

[Anna Rose] (6:50 - 6:53)
Good timing. Did you, what was that like?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (6:54 - 7:44)
Yeah, I mean, the moment before the sale, because at the end of the day, we, I mean, we wrote the smart contract for for managing the sale. And that was like, when it started, we had like our monitoring tools. So we could see how it was going.

But like the 10 minutes before that people were already trying to contribute to it, it started getting very, very stressful. And the days leading up to it, it was like a lot of a lot of work. But yeah, it ended up going well, we didn't get hacked, everything, everything moved smoothly, people got their tokens.

And actually, a lot of people told us because there were already a lot of crazy sales going on, like nothing as it would go after. But it was like, like a pretty boring, boring sale. Like everything just just worked, people got their tokens and that's it.

[Anna Rose] (7:44 - 7:46)
At that time, how much did you guys raise?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (7:46 - 7:55)
20, $25 million. But ETH was lower, I guess back then, eh? Yeah, ETH was at $90 back then.

Yeah, ETH was at $90 back then.

[Anna Rose] (7:55 - 8:06)
So then you had funds. I've never really understood what Aragorn is exactly. So yeah, why don't we start with like, what is the toolkit?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (8:06 - 9:39)
So at the top level, there's the Aragorn project and slash the Aragorn network, as different people call it, which is like a project or a DAO with the mission of making decentralised organisations happen so anyone in the world can use this technology. And for this, the main product that we built, the Aragorn client, which is the tool, the web app that people use to create and manage these organisations. So that's like the main product that we built.

And this gets built by different teams. We had this idea from the early beginning that we didn't want to, I mean, it doesn't really make sense to have a centralised team in charge of this decentralised technology. If something were to happen to the team, someone should be able to carry the charts forward.

So we decided to, rather than just growing one organisation horizontally and hire a lot of people to have multiple teams working on the project that can have different tackle problems from different angles, we're all working for the core product. So Aragorn, the team that I work for, we're 17 people right now and we kind of want to get it to 25 maximum. We don't really want one team to be massive.

We'd very much rather have like three teams as we have right now with a smaller number of people than just one big organisation that becomes harder to manage.

[Anna Rose] (9:40 - 9:49)
What I don't fully get here is like, how would you fund other teams? Are the other teams also funded by the same, like from the same pool? Okay.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (9:50 - 11:20)
So there's the, on top right now in charge of the project, there's this top level entity that's the Aragorn Association. This is the entity that owns the defence of the project that is in charge of basically giving money to different teams and different projects so that the mission of Aragorn gets carried away. For the Aragorn Association, we have this process that we call the AGP process, which is the Aragorn Governance Proposals.

And this is, this was created in November, 2018. That's when AGP1, the AGP that governs how these AGPs work, was voted in by the holders. And this establishes the process by which every three months there's an Aragorn network vote in which people can propose anything that they want to do with the project across just four different tracks.

One of them is finance, which is, okay, let's fund this team, or let's fund this project. Others are like association, which is like more for the policies of the organisation, or like a proclamation, which is like the network saying, okay, this is like the official party of the network. So in this way, when teams want to apply for funding, they just create an AGP.

And then the AGP gets put out to a vote by A&T holders. And if A&T holders approve it, then the Aragorn Association will take care of executing that proposal.

[Anna Rose] (11:21 - 11:27)
Who's in the association? Like, does the association also hold, since they hold a lot, they get to vote as well?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (11:28 - 11:30)
No, the association doesn't doesn't vote.

[Anna Rose] (11:30 - 11:31)
Okay, it doesn't vote.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (11:31 - 11:38)
No. The association has a bunch of A&T as well, but the association doesn't participate in AGPs.

[Anna Rose] (11:38 - 11:59)
Okay, that's interesting. The idea of a DAO, a decentralised autonomous organisation, in the case of Aragorn, seems to permeate through like every level. It's not only there's a tool set for you to build a DAO, but the DAO tool set is built by a DAO.

Like that kind of goes all the way up.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (12:00 - 12:28)
Yeah. And we operate with all our tools, we're the first ones to use them. The whole AGP process is run on Aragorn.

And then the different teams that work for the project, for example, Aragorn One, which is like a normal company, we use Aragorn for managing or the company, like the day to day operations, like directly from the DAO. Even if it's like, there's a legal entity that is responsible for that, we're still using the product for that.

[Anna Rose] (12:29 - 12:41)
Like, is there an Aragorn Two? Or is there like, we sort of mentioned there's an association, and then there's Aragorn One, but who are the other groups? Or are there open slots there?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (12:41 - 12:52)
Yeah, the other groups that are right now, they're called OTARG, which is this team led by Yalda. And then there's Aragorn Black.

[Anna Rose] (12:53 - 12:53)
Aragorn Black.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (12:53 - 12:54)
Yeah.

[Anna Rose] (12:54 - 13:07)
Okay. So there's already like three groups, and they've received their funding from the AGP process. And is there like a runway, I guess, for each one of these?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (13:08 - 13:41)
Yeah. So each team can create their own proposal, and how it's been working ad hoc for new teams is that they've been requesting funding for six months. And then after that, that six months are over, they will do another funding proposal.

So for example, with OTARG, they got six months of funding in the Aragorn Network, vote number one in January. And then in the network vote three in July, they requested one year of funding and they would approve.

[Anna Rose] (13:41 - 13:55)
Okay, cool. Okay, so we have these, so I can kind of see this, you have an overarching association, you have the three groups underneath. Is each one of these groups building like a client?

Are they all building the same thing? How does like, maybe start with like, what is Aragorn One building?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (13:56 - 14:45)
Yeah, that's a great question. I mean, Aragorn One was, a year ago, it was really the only team. So a year ago, we were building basically everything.

And right now, what we are mostly focused on is building the client itself and the core applications for running organisations. So that goes from the onboarding to the client. And so we're working on that quite a bit.

We're also leading the development of the Aragorn Network and the Aragorn Core right now. Yeah, we collaborate a lot with OTARG, especially on the client side. And then Aragorn Black right now is mostly focused on Aragorn fundraising, which is this application to allow DAOs to directly fundraise themselves.

[Anna Rose] (14:45 - 14:47)
What's OTARG building?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (14:48 - 15:45)
OTARG, they're building this super interesting set of apps that's called Open Enterprise now. So these are like four or five apps that you get to instal in your organisation and you can manage bounties directly in the organisation. They also built this dot voting application with a different voting mechanism in which people can not only vote on binary decisions, but express their preference for different options with basically percentages.

And then that can lead to many people voting and splitting money proportionally for many initiatives or issues. And we have a team that is running their own bounties for GitHub issues on Open Enterprise right now. So that's really exciting.

And then they're also doing a bunch of infrastructure work in the client and leading some of the efforts behind identity. And now they're going to tackle finance.

[Anna Rose] (15:45 - 15:55)
Are all of these dApps or are they concepts? Are they kind of like legal? Are they kind of legal structures that are created or are they all technology?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (15:56 - 15:57)
They're all technology.

[Anna Rose] (15:58 - 15:59)
And are they all dApps?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (16:00 - 17:36)
They're kind of dApps that run inside the Aragorn client. So we built Aragorn in a pretty modular way because rather than building for a very specific type of organisation structure, like other projects do, like, okay, this is a way that we think that people are want to organise or that we want to organise and we're going to build this code specifically for this. We took a modular approach and we're like, we're not sure how people are going to want to organise, but we know that this is the way that we could model it so that other people could build any governance model on top of this and decide how to build their organisation kind of like Legos.

So for this, we created this kind of module system inside the Aragorn client so developers can build their own Aragorn applications. So when we launched, we had like these three core apps. So there's like voting, tokens for membership and finance to manage the organisation assets.

But then, for example, now Aragorn Black has worked on fundraising and they can just build like that app and then organisations can add that app to their org and they take an organisation that just had like very basic functionality and now it can fundraise. And they could also instal like open enterprise and start giving out work to a bunch of open source contributors. So it's kind of this modular approach in which people get to really build the organisation however they want without involving writing any code or as minimum code as possible.

[Anna Rose] (17:36 - 17:51)
But does it live on Ethereum still? Because like Ant is an ERC20. That's why I'm just kind of curious, are these all like smart contracts or are these like web applications that are kind of linked a little bit to a blockchain?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (17:52 - 18:20)
No, so these are like totally, they're kind of like little dApps that live within Aragorn. They have a smart contract component that is using Aragorn OS and it's part of the organisation. And then there's like also the frontend component of the dApp.

So kind of what it looks like, it's like you get it on the sidebar with all the apps that the organisation has and you can just add different apps. So it's kind of like a little app store for organisations.

[Anna Rose] (18:21 - 18:39)
Okay. So now I think we have a bit of a picture of the Aragorn world and some of the products. Is Aragorn also doing advocacy or some sort of like, are you guys working on like understanding legality of some of these systems or like developing the contracts that would work in them as well?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (18:40 - 19:26)
So we're like, none of the Aragorn teams are directly working on this as a product that we provide. We're not, we don't want to turn ourselves into a law firm. That would really suck.

So, but there are people from the community that are already like linking Aragorn organisations to real world entities. This project called Open ESQ, they opened up the first LLC that was actually controlled by a DAO like this early this year. So that was the first time that we saw a DAO become like a controlled legal entity.

So that was pretty, pretty exciting, but this is something that we're not really working towards at least at Aragorn one.

[Anna Rose] (19:27 - 19:34)
So Aragorn as a network also has this NEST programme and this FLOC programme. Is that the same as the AGPs that you were mentioning before?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (19:34 - 19:54)
So the FLOC programme is the, what we were talking before about different teams that work on Aragorn getting funding. That's FLOC and it goes through the AGP process. And then we have NEST, which is our grants programme for smaller projects of people working on cool things for Aragorn or Ethereum.

[Anna Rose] (19:55 - 20:07)
So those, the NEST programme is also for projects maybe that aren't in any way working on DAOs, but just happen to use a DAO or projects that you think are useful for the ecosystem?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (20:08 - 21:16)
Yeah. So when we started with NEST, we did give more grants to more general Ethereum infrastructure. For example, we gave a grant to Prismatic Labs that was working on Ethereum sharding.

And now it's working on their own Ethereum client and a bunch of other Ethereum infrastructure, like a native transaction signer for the desktop. But now we're like the last grants that we've given are to people working on cool things on Aragorn. So for example, there's this project and I'm helping out that they're calling it Empower the DAO.

So they use like this piece on Aragorn DAOs, it's called the agent that allows it to interact with other protocols. And they're building integration with Compound so that the DAO can lend its assets on Compound and also Uniswap or Manatee and enzymes. So we're having these projects building integrations or cool stuff.

For example, there's LevelK building a Futurkey app for Aragorn. So it's super, super exciting.

[Anna Rose] (21:17 - 21:37)
Let's talk now a bit more generally about DAOs, because I think, I mean, Aragorn is a project in itself, but there are other DAOs out there. And I'm really curious kind of like what you make of it. So why don't we start off with like a really mini history of DAOs and like where you see it starting and maybe some examples along the way.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (21:38 - 24:02)
Yeah. Yeah, I think you can take it back to like and talk about how Bitcoin is kind of a DAO, which is like totally autonomous organisation that is not run by anyone in particular. So it's centralised and it kind of has a mission to continue producing blocks and secure blocks.

And you have people all over the world working for this DAO to secure the network. So I think that's kind of a real DAO. But I think the DAO that made the term well known was like the DAO in 2016.

So yeah, this was a very, very interesting DAO. It was like a for profit vehicle that acted kind of as a VC on the blockchain. So it raised a bunch of money.

Then everyone got super excited. It got to raise a crazy amount. And because everyone was so excited, the price of ETH was also going up.

It had some game theoretical issues that some people pointed out in the DAO moratorium. And people were not even voting in proposals because they were a bit scared about these issues that were being pointed out. And eventually it was like someone posted on Reddit, I think the DAO is getting drained.

And it was indeed getting drained because of a bug that there was in the DAO, in the code that allowed people to kind of create their own child DAOs to live through the DAO. So yeah, this was in the summer of 2016 that then led to the whole Ethereum classic drama and the fork. So yeah, I think then after that, the term DAO got like a bit of a bad rep.

But I think like especially these years when we're starting to see that people are being way more open and excited about DAOs again. And I think that's really cool. And I think it's only going to increase in the next few years when we start getting again big DAOs with a lot of people being big entities in the space.

[Anna Rose] (24:02 - 24:12)
What are some examples of DAOs today that you think are kind of exciting? Either projects that sit on a DAO or that are in themselves just a DAO?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (24:13 - 24:40)
Yeah, I mean, I think ourselves is one of the best examples of a DAO operating in a centralised way. Then there's projects like Moloch that a lot of people are excited about, which is kind of like a grand style in which people have donated some money there and are coordinating around different goals that they want to accomplish.

[Anna Rose] (24:41 - 24:46)
Is Moloch built using Eragon's stuff or is it like did they build it themselves?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (24:46 - 25:29)
Yeah, Moloch took the approach of building it themselves. They wanted a very simple mechanism that worked for their particular mission of what they wanted to do and they built it custom code to do that, but just in a very specific way, which has the issue that if you want to use it for slightly different thing, you probably need to end up rewriting a lot of the code. But I think it's good that for that particular use case, they came up with a pretty interesting mechanism.

And we're actually now building some of the ideas that Moloch implemented and building them as modules that Eragon DAOs can use.

[Anna Rose] (25:29 - 25:37)
And then it was MetaCartel, that is a fork of Moloch. And they did some changes, I guess, to that as well, or just the numbers.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (25:37 - 25:47)
I think they're using the exact same code base. But yeah, it's a pretty similar idea for the DAO.

[Anna Rose] (25:47 - 25:55)
What about something like DXDAO? Is that how you say it? DXDAO?

I think so, yeah. Do you know anything about that?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (25:55 - 26:18)
I haven't followed it super, super, super closely. But I think the idea is that there was this exchange, the Dutch exchange, and they handed over the control to this DAO and it's in charge of deciding what tokens to get listed and some other decisions about this change. I'm not a member of the DAO myself.

[Anna Rose] (26:19 - 26:46)
I remember I had a friend who pinged me and was super excited about it. It was like, wow, look at this inaction. It actually has voting and there's a huge percentage of people participating and it's super decentralised.

Then I also heard that after a bit of time, there was a form of centralisation or cartel-like behaviour that formed. And maybe this is something I think would be really good for us to talk about. What does it mean to game a DAO?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (26:47 - 29:45)
Well, there are many, many ways that you can game a DAO. The most terrible attack, the one that I'm the most scared about is 51% attacks. So the way that this works is, imagine that you have an organisation in which you have simple majority voting for doing anything.

So if there's a vote and the majority of the organisation agrees to do something, it has total control over the organisation. So send all the money somewhere else. So you can have someone malicious that if anyone can create proposals and there's nothing at stake that says, okay, I propose that we move all of this money in the organisation to a smart contract that is going to split all the money in the organisation between everyone that votes yes in the proposal.

So with zero cost to the attacker, you can have this way to disrupt the organisation. And as a voter, you're not risking anything. If the attack happens and it actually passes and you didn't vote for it, you're getting burned.

So the rational thing may be to just vote yes. In that way, you're voting to distract the organisation. And the crazy thing is that it has totally zero cost to the attacker.

And it's something that cannot happen in the real world, in illegal companies, because you have fiduciary responsibilities. And if someone were to do that, then there would be people that go to jail or that would be in deep trouble. But with decentralised organisations, you cannot really act after the fact.

If someone does this attack, then that's it. The money has moved and you cannot really stop this. So this is a problem that we're working on solving with this concept called proposal agreements.

So the idea is that organisations could have subjective rules for what proposals are valid and which proposals are invalid, and also try to encode what the values and the mission of the organisation is. And this is something that you really don't want to write in code. So you write that down in English or whatever language.

And then when people are making proposals, if someone doesn't think that that proposal should be valid per the organisation, they just don't think it's a bad proposal. It's invalid. This is something that cannot happen.

You cannot take the money, steal the money for a subset of members of the organisation. That's kind of illegal. So someone can challenge that and put it to the Argonne Court, which is a network of jurors.

They will look at the evidence. They will look at what the rules for the organisation are and make a subjective judgement on whether that proposal was even valid in the first place.

[Anna Rose] (29:46 - 29:47)
Wait, this is the Argonne Court?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (29:47 - 29:48)
Yeah.

[Anna Rose] (29:48 - 29:54)
And you send this off to jurors. That's the terminology you're using there. Interesting.

So what's the court?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (29:54 - 31:28)
So the Argonne Court is a protocol of the Argonne network. So the idea of the court is to have a way to dispute resolution on subjective issues, like does this proposal follow the rules of the organisation for making proposals? Because there's a lot of subjective judgement in running an organisation that it's impossible for a smart contract to see.

Like a proposal to move all the money of the organisation because there's a bug and we want to move it somewhere else. And a proposal to move all the money to this contract that splits it between all the attackers. Looks the same.

It's exactly the same. It's just the intent and what's behind it. And this is something that a computer cannot compute and make a decision.

So this is why we have to include this subjective mechanism with the Argonne Court. There's a very simple protocol in which you have a set of jurors that are taking the court. And every time that there's a dispute, a random set of jurors get sampled and they're asked, OK, what do you think?

How do you think this should go? Is it valid or invalid? They vote.

There's a period in which everyone can appeal the decision and get more jurors involved. But if there are no appeals, then that decision gets made and gets sent back to the organisation saying, OK, this proposal is valid or invalid.

[Anna Rose] (31:29 - 31:32)
Who is the jurors? Are they just token holders?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (31:32 - 31:51)
Well, the jurors are people that want to work for this. So they take tokens and become jurors. And they have a risk of being slashed if they don't support the winning ruling of a dispute.

So, yeah, they're just people that want to work on this.

[Anna Rose] (31:52 - 31:56)
They get slashed if they don't support a winning ruling. Can the court be gamed?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (31:57 - 32:47)
So in the v1 of the court, there's this idea that we want to have a decision finality in a reasonable amount of time because we don't want proposals like disputes just going over like months and months. So we have kind of this soft limit around one month in which we want to solve a dispute. So if a dispute starts getting appealed, there's just a number of appeal rounds that it can go over.

And after that, there's like this final appeal round in which all of the active jurors in the court get selected and ask, OK, this has gotten very, very far into here. So we're just going to get everyone involved because this may be...

[Anna Rose] (32:47 - 32:49)
Like a network affecting judgement.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (32:50 - 34:22)
Yeah. So with that, getting to that point is actually pretty expensive. In every appeal step, two parties need to be positive collateral in different possible rulings.

But if we get to that point, it's just like, what's the judgement of the entire network? And that if it gets to a point, it's very unlikely that the network would decide to not rule for the correct ruling if everyone was involved. But that would be the most challenging part.

But there's this research that we have been doing and we'll probably not make it for v1 rather than just resolving at that point. If people are still disagreeing with what the majority of the jurors in the court thought the ruling was, basically open a future key market and say, OK, we have these two possible universes. There's the universe in which the court says the ruling was A and this universe in which the ruling was B.

What would be the price of A and T in both cases? And then a prediction market is open for both. And you take the one in which the universe in which the price of A and T would be greater because the price of A and T should go down if the court is making bad rulings because that will impact future fees and jurors not joining the court.

So yeah, that's something that will not make it for v1, but will make the court much less difficult to claim.

[Anna Rose] (34:23 - 34:30)
Wow. And this is crazy that you've actually recreated a court system like this. Did you expect to be doing this when you were starting out?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (34:32 - 35:31)
Yeah, I mean, it was kind of obvious that if we really wanted to make sovereign DAOs really work, and these are DAOs that don't have a link to the real world, they're not really an LLC or a C corp that gets interacted with this neat interface. The DAO only exists in code and on the blockchain, that we would need some of these services that the real world has. And dispute resolution and arbitration is a huge thing because there's so many subtleties that you just don't want to code into a smart contract.

Not even that you could, but it's really, really hard. So it was kind of obvious that if we really wanted these sovereign DAOs to exist, we need a way for resolving subjective disputes that come from people dealing with people.

[Anna Rose] (35:32 - 35:34)
But does this mean that there's now going to be like DAO lawyers?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (35:35 - 36:00)
Maybe. I hope that we make it simple enough so that people can just deal with it without having to involve lawyers. But yeah, it could definitely happen.

People that specialise in just writing these manifestos that the court will understand and then making the case to the court.

[Anna Rose] (36:01 - 36:35)
Well, I mean, if you look back in history at how legal systems developed, like if you want to look at ancient Rome or something, it started out quite simple. And then what would happen is there'd be an edge case, and then a new rule would be created and written down somewhere. And then that would happen over and over and over again.

And then big shifts in mood or there'd be new ideas that have flourished and the laws that existed needed to be rewritten. And what you ended up with, even then, was this very complicated legal system that only few people were expert at. And I do wonder if we're not seeing potentially the beginnings of that here.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (36:35 - 36:48)
Yeah. And this is the thing that one of the big projects that we're focussing the most at Argonne One is getting this V1 of the Argonne network with the Argonne court ready for the end of the year.

[Anna Rose] (36:49 - 36:54)
Do you think in the Argonne toolkit, though, say I want a DAO, would I also create a court?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (36:55 - 37:35)
No, you can just use the Argonne court of the network. So the way that it's been designed is that when you have a DAO, you could choose who is your oracle for dispute resolution. And that could be the Argonne court that the network agrees like, okay, this is our court, but someone could fork the court and do something else or just go with a simpler mechanism, which is like, okay, we're going to get this person or this DAO to decide here.

So it's totally possible that people use other oracles, but the Argonne court will be the default.

[Anna Rose] (37:36 - 37:43)
Wow. And it's interesting here because you're thinking of an oracle, like in this case, is an oracle a jury in a weird way?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (37:44 - 38:08)
Yeah, definitely. I mean, from the DAO's perspective, it just needs, okay, who is like, I just need this entity to tell me what to do because I cannot resolve this with my code. So yeah, the Argonne court is a subjective oracle that involves humans and jurors and like an appeals process to get to a final ruling.

But at the end of the day, it's like a jury oracle.

[Anna Rose] (38:10 - 38:24)
Do you have another example of sort of a way that a DAO could be gamed? And then maybe we could even like, it'd be interesting to see like, how would that go through the system up to the for me to understand that even a little better?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (38:25 - 38:39)
Yeah. So in terms of the court, this 51% protection or making sure that organisations stick to their manifesto, that's the main use case for the court right now.

[Anna Rose] (38:39 - 39:15)
But what if it was something like, okay, so another way that I've heard DAOs could be gamed is like say a malicious whale, instead of like putting the idea, oh, if you vote for me, I you know, I will give you tokens. What if a malicious whale or just like a whale who's super pissed at some group of people, and they're asking for funding and a malicious whale jumps on board buys a bunch of and votes against a proposal to fund that group that they don't like. And the whole is super obvious to everybody.

Could there be like, would that ever hit a court? Because to me, that's a bit of an attack.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (39:16 - 40:41)
I mean, in that case, what I would say is that they should, if the if the network was like, did want to make that make that happen, then it should be voted again. And some people that didn't didn't show up to vote, they should go and vote. But the thing that we're really solving with the with the court is like, avoiding invalid proposals per the organisation's rules or values.

Like, if we're have an organisation that is gonna fund open source work on on Argonne, and someone submits a proposal to, I don't know, like, build a gambling game on Tron, that that thing student, like, even if the whale, there's like a Tron whale in the doubt, there really wants it to happen and has 51% of the of the tokens. The way that the court protects you that that proposal doesn't even get voted on, or like, someone can stop the voting and say, okay, even if you have 51% of the tokens, we have these rules in the organisation that we're not gonna even like entertain the idea of doing this. So that's really what the what the court is protecting, like not making bad proposals pass.

But if a whale buys a bunch of tokens, and the network still wants to do that, but they didn't show up to vote, they should submit it again and do show up to vote.

[Anna Rose] (40:42 - 41:02)
And then what I guess you get there is you do get this idea of like lobbyists, almost like you, I know, these terms are super loaded, and we don't like them. But you do get these, you know, advocates for certain proposals. And they want to some of their job, I guess, would be to go around two whales or two large holders and like, rally them to this cause.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (41:02 - 42:26)
Yeah. And we've kind of heard that this has happened in some contentious AGPs that there were in the in the past or when teams were getting funding. But yeah, I think that's, that's okay.

And like the these whales at the end of the day, are are heavily involved in the in the ecosystem, and they should have a say. And this, I believe that voting will get way more participation once we release that delegation, so that people can delegate to if they want to be a more passive holder in the in the DAO, they can say, Okay, I want this person to to vote for me or this other DAO even. And then they delegate their vote.

And if at some point and don't agree with whatever they're voting, then they can take, they can like overrule the vote or even like take the delegation back. So I think that will, that will improve a lot because for some big, big holders, they're just taking the tokens out of custody. And cold storage is just a big hassle for for voting in some AGPs.

Like sometimes when there have been important AGPs, some, some people have done that, but it would be easier to just keep the tokens in cold storage and delegate that to either a holder key that the that they have or, or to an organisation that they know will vote in their best interest.

[Anna Rose] (42:27 - 42:29)
Wow. And then you have representatives.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (42:29 - 42:29)
Yeah.

[Anna Rose] (42:31 - 43:18)
And soon there'll be like a little council, maybe a parliament. But that's, this is so it's interesting that it's kind of getting to that point. Um, do you feel like as time goes on, you're going to see more and more of these kind of cases emerge and, and there might be some weird cases.

I'm sure you guys are looking back over sort of case studies and thinking of ways to mediate it, but who is like, which of those teams, which of the teams is like working on the ideas? Because here it's, even though I'm, I know that there's like a technical switch or something that's created, but really first, before you can create the technical, you need to figure out like, like what's the system and who's developing that. Like, how do you, how do you come up with these ideas for courts or new rules or, yeah.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (43:19 - 44:18)
Yeah. So this is, um, a lot of the ideas that we're finishing to implement now, they were in the original, in the original white paper, um, that, that were like in the second white paper that we wrote in, um, early 20, 2017. Um, so yeah, it's like just a lot of discussions with the team on how, how to make that, how to make that happen.

Um, so in the, in the past, like Argonne one has been leading the ideation research and development of the, of the Argonne network. Um, but now we're seeing that other teams are also starting their own, their own projects, uh, under the, the Argonne, um, the Argonne ecosystem. And yeah, so it's, it's kind of in, in this moment that almost everything that we, um, set out to build is, is getting to a point that is like ready, almost ready to ready to launch.

And now there's a lot of cool, interesting things that people are starting to do and come up with their own projects.

[Anna Rose] (44:18 - 44:47)
So far, what we've heard is like, there's voting, like, I'm just thinking, what are the mechanisms in DAOs? There's voting. And this is where like, if you happen to have a lot of tokens and you have a, you have more of a vote, if you've taken it out of cold storage and you're willing to participate, um, are there any other mechanisms that you guys are exploring where maybe it wouldn't be the amount of tokens, but rather like an individual gets to vote?

Is this something that you guys are actually thinking about? Yeah. What do you think of that?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (44:47 - 46:08)
Yeah. We've had this, um, support for this actually for, for a long time, just that people weren't, weren't really using it that, that way. But I think there's, um, there's very interesting things to do with, with reputation.

Uh, there's this, uh, this team that, um, is, is working on integrating this, um, this protocol source grid, uh, that allows you to analyse the reputation, like get a reputation graph on a project based on contributions to GitHub or discourse. Um, and they're trying to bridge that back into the DAOs so that you have like voting power in, in, in relation to what your reputation is, uh, which comes down to how much you're contributing to the, to the project. Um, so I think that's, that's super exciting.

Um, and the DAO zero project, they're, they're leading, they're leading that. And I'm super excited to, to see that. Um, and there are also, there are more, um, sci-fi, uh, governance, um, models, like future key that I'm super excited that it's getting to a point that we will start seeing experiments with this in the very, like in the next few months.

Um, actually for the next AGP, we'll maybe have like a signalling, um, a signalling market, a future key market for the, for the AGP that it will have like it's on parallel, uh, future key boat.

[Anna Rose] (46:08 - 46:11)
What is, so I don't think we've defined this, but what is future key?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (46:11 - 47:23)
Yeah. So the, the whole idea of future key is that rather than having, uh, people, uh, vote for, uh, what they, what they think should, should happen. Um, the organisation has like a metric that it's trying to, to optimise for, uh, and whenever you, you're faced with a decision, it's, it's just looking at, okay, well, if the, if we voted, if, if we went with Jess, uh, what do we think the outcome, like this metric would go to?

So a very simple way would be like the price of a token. Um, so we have this decision to make, uh, if we go Jess, what is going to be the price of the token in five years, uh, or like in five months, uh, if we go be, what is going to be the price of a token for, for this. And then you have like a prediction market on, on both.

And people start betting on how would the outcome, uh, of each of the options is, uh, but they're actually not betting on what they think it's, it's better. They're actually putting their money, uh, where their, where their mouth is and saying, okay, yeah, I bet that this will be, uh, good for the token up to like a 50% increase in price. And they actually have a, have a bet on that.

[Anna Rose] (47:25 - 47:29)
They're sort of betting on the outcome. They're not betting on what they want necessarily. Yeah.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (47:29 - 47:34)
It's betting on how good, well, the outcome would, will be for the organisation.

[Anna Rose] (47:35 - 47:39)
So what do you think the biggest risk facing DAOs is right now?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (47:40 - 48:47)
Yeah, I think there's an amount of technical risk. Um, and this technology is still being, um, not, not super old. And so far we haven't seen, um, a big smart contract back in a, in a while, but it's still like pretty, pretty nice in technology and people should, should be careful, um, careful with it.

Uh, but then there's also, um, interesting implications from the, from the legal side, uh, in the moment that you don't have, um, any, any legal link, uh, to the organisation. And it's just people like making decisions with the, with an organisation that is just running on the, on the blockchain. So yeah, the legal implications about how does this get interpreted in different jurisdictions is, is very interesting.

Um, and also there's like risk of someone creating a DAO for doing something, something bad, which is definitely possible. Like people using good technology to do bad things as it's happened with every, every technology. And that could give the space a bit of a bad reputation.

[Anna Rose] (48:48 - 49:38)
Yeah, that's actually, I didn't think about that part with the legal stuff. Like that is actually, that's, that was a question that I've, that I've had myself where it's like, say you are running your organisation as a DAO and you've collected funds and you want to distribute those funds and say, it's like, you're, you're actually distributing them like pay. How do you, like, it's almost like, how do you declare maybe as an individual, it's actually not that complicated to declare.

Cause you like have an amount of things and there's a service and it's like, whatever you wrote an invoice to somewhere, but like, how does like that would then, if say you declared your taxes and you include this cool, you as an individual is great, but this organisation that paid you, like it's sort of a link to this thing and it isn't filing any taxes. So like, what happens with that?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (49:39 - 50:59)
Yeah, this is a very interesting question. And this is an idea that we've been kind of working on, but never really got to implementing it. That is this idea of DAO proxies, which are rather than having like a one-to-one relationship with a, with a, like having a DAO on a legal entity, having like organise, like companies that can be like service providers for, for DAOs so that they could be the entity that invoices for a bunch of, a bunch of DAOs.

There's like a lot of very bleeding edge, legal, legal work that has to be done here. Like we don't have the expertise in the team right now, but we're actually, it's something that the Argonne Association is looking into, into knowing people that, that could be interesting in working on this, like seeing how we can create these, these links that are not, okay, we have a DAO and we have a company or a corporation that represents a DAO, which I think it's not really, it kind of misses the point. It's like at that point, you're just doing like nicer interfaces for companies. But having like these service providers that you can have this sovereign DAOs and just use them for sending invoices or like owning real estate or something like that.

I think that's, that's super interesting, but there's definitely more work needs to be done in this area.

[Anna Rose] (50:59 - 51:06)
Are there any jurisdictions that are actually working with DAOs or on DAOs? Why did I hear something about like Vermont?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (51:09 - 52:01)
Yeah. I haven't, I haven't heard about, haven't heard about that. Yeah.

There's like something interesting going on in the, in the state of Wyoming, in the, in the US that they're creating kind of this sandbox for, regulatory sandbox for organisations to create there. But I think most of the things that we're seeing are like just maybe recognising the DAO as a legal entity in, in those jurisdictions. But yeah, I think the, we should see it like the, the way that we should pursue it is that some jurisdictions start seeing them as their own thing and don't try to regulate them and, or like make them appear as a, as a legal entity there.

Because the moment that you have a jurisdiction that recognise you as a legal entity, then okay, you're, you're into the, into the system again.

[Anna Rose] (52:02 - 52:05)
Yeah. So I found it, by the way, it's D-ORG.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (52:06 - 52:06)
D-ORG?

[Anna Rose] (52:06 - 52:24)
D-ORG announced in June that it was the first legally established decentralised autonomous organisation in US law. And it's a BBLLC, a blockchain-based limited liability company in Vermont. I can put the link in the, in the show notes if somebody's curious.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (52:24 - 52:58)
Yeah. There, there was actually Ross from the Argonne community that works in OpenESQ that created like the, I think the first one is one that he created like earlier in the year, like April of May or May, that created like a New York LLC linked with a, with a DAO. And they have like this, this way of very easily creating an LLC for your, for your DAO.

So I think like, as far as I'm aware of, Ross's is the, is the OG DAO linked to the real world. But yeah.

[Anna Rose] (52:59 - 53:09)
Well, there, it sounds like there's a few more experiments going on at least, but I think you're right where it's like, if you're just linking it right to another company, then you're eventually tapping into the same problems.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (53:09 - 53:12)
Yeah. You're the company within ICER.

[Anna Rose] (53:13 - 53:24)
Well, it's going to be interesting. What do you think, what's exciting to you right now when you look forward? Like, what do you think, do you, where can you picture a DAO?

What place do you picture it taking in the future?

[Jorge Izquierdo] (53:25 - 54:43)
Yeah. I'm excited to see big DAOs again. I think the, the DAO, like the 2016, the DAO was amazing.

Like maybe we got a little too excited too soon and we threw double digits percentages of the ETH supply to something that was unproven. But I think it was super exciting to see like massive amounts of capital and attention being pulled into, into an idea and everyone collaborating to do due diligence for projects and deciding how to, how the DAO was going to make a return for everyone, which was like a pretty, pretty simple mission that DAO has is like, we're going to make investments and make a bunch of money. So I'm excited to see big DAOs like, like this one that, that people are, we get the technology to a point that people are not scared.

And that is safe actually to do like a big organisation that has like a big, a big goal and not only a DAO that just, we put money inside and it kind of leaks, leaks it in the form of grants, but that actually has a mission and a goal to exist for a lot of years. And that, that involves becoming self, self-sustainable.

[Anna Rose] (54:44 - 54:54)
Well, listen, I want to say thank you so much for coming on the podcast and giving me a walk through the Eragon DAO, the setup and DAOs in general. Yeah.

[Jorge Izquierdo] (54:54 - 54:55)
Thanks so much. It was super fun.

[Anna Rose] (54:55 - 55:13)
And I think there's definitely a lot to take from this. I feel like we see it, we do see more and more DAOs popping up around. And I had never really realised the, the sort of far reaching implications that, that having a DAO could have.

So this has been really helpful. Thanks a lot. Yeah.

Thanks. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.
