[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:13)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, in our third instalment of the 6-part miniseries on lean Ethereum, Nico is joined by Giacomo Fenzi, PhD student at EPFL, and Antonio Sanso from the Ethereum Foundation.


They discuss the theory and security of post-quantum SNARKs, the hash-based proof system that will underpin LeanVM and signature aggregation in a post-quantum Ethereum.


For these episodes, we have Nico as our host. We are also releasing this in video form over on our YouTube channel. Links are in the show notes, in case you want to check it out over there, and be sure to subscribe to the channel while you're at it.


In this conversation, Nico, Antonio, and Giacomo discuss the recent wave of research on proximity gap conjectures and the $1 million in Proximity Prizes offered by the EF, an initiative which has prompted a flurry of new papers on this topic.


It's a deep dive into the mathematical foundations that determine how much confidence we can place in post-quantum proof systems.


Hope you will watch or listen along to this and other episodes in our miniseries. And yeah, let us know what you think.


Now before we kick off, three quick points.


First, zkSummit is coming back with its 14th edition. Applications to attend and/or speak are now open. It will be on May 7th in Rome. So hope to see you there.


Second, zkMesh+, our paid subscription tier, is rolling. We have already released a few bonus clips from the show, as well as some of our exclusive research reports, like the State of ZK Report and its addendums. If you want access, please join the paid tier on zkMesh+.


Third, if you're looking for other ways to support the show, we have donation accounts visible in the footer of our website. So if you choose to do so, thank you in advance.


That's all for now. Links are in the show notes. And here is Nico's interview with Giacomo and Antonio.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:16 - 2:34)
Today, I'm here with Giacomo Fenzi, PhD student at EPFL, and Antonio Sanso, cryptography researcher at the Ethereum Foundation.


This is Episode 3 of our miniseries on the lean Ethereum Upgrade, and this one is dedicated to the theory and security of post-quantum SNARKs.


Hello, Giacomo. Welcome back to the show.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (2:34 - 2:34)
Hi. How's it going?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:35 - 2:37)
Good. Thanks.


And hello, Antonio. Also welcome back to the show.


[Antonio Sanso] (2:37 - 2:39)
Yeah. Thank you.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:39 - 2:47)
Actually, before we get started, I'm curious. You both have already been on the show. What's been happening with you guys since you were last here?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (2:48 - 3:19)
That's a good question. So I think I was here last time, one year or two years ago. I was here with Gal. We were talking about STIR, which was at the time, our new and fancy protocol that had just gotten out.


Since then, we've had a few other cute and fancier protocols, maybe I would say. So we had like WHIR, we had WARP, TensorSwitch, and a few other things.


And I'm still in Switzerland in EPFL, enjoying the mountains, let's say, with a bit of cryptography on the side.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (3:20 - 3:28
Nice. How about you, Antonio? Actually, last time you came on, you were talking about kind of the opposite of what we're doing here, like very non-post-quantum SNARKs, right?


[Antonio Sanso] (3:28 - 4:00)
Exactly. Yeah.


Well, we talked about some elliptic curve stuff and I don't know, someone decided to kill my area of research. So there used to be elliptic curves and now they're gone, and isogenies.


But lately, I've actually tried to pivot from elliptic curves and isogenies, and since then, I've been mostly working on Poseidon and now like on STARK and more in general, some proof system.


And yeah, that's life.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (4:01 - 4:36)
Look, we adapt and we learn. So far on the series, we've covered the fact that Ethereum is moving to post-quantum signatures, like post-quantum everything, essentially. We've learned that we also need multi-signatures for consensus and that to achieve those, we're going to be using a SNARK.


I've also been told that there is a custom VM being built, LeanVM, and that's actually the topic of next episode. But what I was curious about is, what SNARK are we using to prove this VM? Is this like good old classic Groth16? Are we using off-the-shelves too, Plonky2? What's happening?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (4:37 - 5:23)
Yeah. So things are changing a little bit. So from the old Thai way of doing cryptography, the main focus of some  of this upgrade of Ethereum is about trying to get to post-quantum resistance. So a lot of the techniques that we were previously using cannot really work.


So both for conservatism and for performance, the choice has fallen towards hash-based signatures. And LeanVM is currently being built on top of a custom stack of different components, like trying to be built for the signature aggregation stack, which uses a VM arithmetization and then WHIR as the, let's call it, polynomial commitment plus underlying the construction.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (5:23 - 5:32)
Okay. And so is this a sumcheck-based SNARK? Is this univariate based with our good old like quotients like we like to do?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (5:33 - 6:31)
So we're doing things modern. We're in the 2026. Multilinear is the way to go, and LeanVM is also following this multilinear approach using sumchecks as much as possible.


So the whole arithmetization is multilinear orientated, and it is using at the same time other like lookup techniques like [?] Logup Star, which I think Tomas and Emile will be telling us much more in the next episode. But multilinear is the name of the game.


Recently, I think a lot of people have been realizing that this is the way to actually do hash-based proof systems in general. And it has a lot of benefits.


So currently, there's been a big push from industry and academia alike to move towards multilinear proof systems and sumcheck, of course.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (6:17 - 6:19)
And so is there a name for this SNARK?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (6:20 - 6:31)
So not really. As far as I know, it's just called the Super Spartan plus Logup slash Logup star plus WHIR.


So maybe they need to...


[Nico Mohnblatt] (6:31 - 6:32)
A bit of a mouthful.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (6:32 - 6:36)
Yeah. So let's just call it the LeanVM stack for now.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (6:37 - 7:02)
Okay. So we have this new SNARK. It's using components that we are somewhat familiar with or that have been around in different papers.


There was still, I guess, some security questions. I remember Justin Drake announcing actually on the show a $1 million prize for something about hash-based proofs.


Can you guys tell us a bit more about what that was about, how that connects to the SNARK and what the hell happened with proximity gaps?


[Antonio Sanso] (7:03 - 8:25)
Yeah. I can actually just give a bit of history here.


There is always this dichotomy between security and speed. And in the hash-based SNARK, you can actually play really safe and go slow or being aggressive on mathematics and on conjectures and being fast.


And the tendency in the last years has been to go [?] crypto and blockchain. So the tendency was speed and at the cost of potential security in the last years.


So what was happening? We wanted to have a bit more confidence on the conjecture we were using on some of this proof system deployment. And there was this proximity gap prize of $1 million that was announced by Justin Drake and sponsored by the Ethereum Foundation. Like $1 million in prize if someone was actually able to break.


So I'll give you a counter example or prove these conjectures that are associated to this SNARK or FRI. And maybe Giacomo wants to... since Giacomo is one of the judges of this prize, maybe he wants to spend some more words there. But this was giving a bit of context.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (8:26 - 11:21)
Yeah. Absolutely.


So I'm helping out with the judging submissions. And together with Dan Boneh and Gal Arnon, we're writing like a summary because as Nico was saying, a lot of things have happened in the last month, especially like in November, a lot of paper came out. There's been a lot of things going on.


But maybe let me take a step back on what this prize is about, what are these conjectures and how they kind of fit in in the larger like hash-based landscape.


Most hash-based SNARKs, they rely on very similar techniques. They're similar to batching in a certain sense, but with some slight differences.


So for example, batching when we are talking about like in proof system is this concept of like I have many claims, of which some of them might be valid, some of them might be invalid. And I want to make sure that I can take many claims, compress them into a single one, and if any of the original claim was invalid, then I would want the final claim to also be invalid.


So in a certain sense, I'm kind of preserving the validity of the entire system into a single claim while performing some kind of compression.


And these kind of primitives are the main building block of proof systems in general, but hash based in particular.


So in hash-based proof system, this has to do a lot with error-correcting codes. And the condition of when some error-correcting codes that have been corrupted overall by a large fraction of their codeword end up being batched into something that ends up being corrupted in a smaller fraction of the codeword.


So in a sense, the corruptions are easy to detect. So at the end, the verifier will figure them out.


But if I'm kind of reducing the amount of corruptions in the codeword, then this makes for the verifier harder to detect things.


And the Proximity Prize is about trying to figure out effectively how these distance preservation kind of claims end up behaving in the context of a hash-based SNARK.


And we know that for certain levels and fraction of corruptions, we can prove security, provably. And once the noise instead becomes too large, we know that the security cannot be guaranteed.


And we know there's like an area in the middle where we don't... our current mathematical techniques do not tell us enough to really be able to prove security of protocols. We don't neither know ways to break security, neither do we know how to prove security.


And traditionally, people have been conjecturing that this area were secure. And the proximity prize, the main objective is to try to really put the foot down on formalizing what these conjectures are and trying to spur research into really figuring out what the behavior will be in these areas.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (11:21 - 11:33)
Right. So just to be clear, it doesn't mean our SNARKs are insecure. It's just like the way we analyze them and the way we compute parameters changes depending on what the mathematics tell us is true or not. Right?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (11:34 - 12:41)
Exactly. Exactly.


So maybe there's a lot of luxury that we have in hash-based cryptography in that we don't really have to rely on cryptographic assumptions other than the collision resistance of an hash function.


What it basically means is that the proof system can be fully proven secure in the random oracle model. What this means is that if we believe the random oracle, we can give concrete information theoretical guarantees on the soundness of the protocol.


This is different, for example, from elliptic curve in lattice-based cryptography where a better algorithm to solve certain problems would make progress in breaking the cryptographic system.


So we know that our analysis guarantees security up to some point, and we do suspect that security is also guaranteed after this point, up to some point, after which actually there would be attacks.


And maybe there are information theoretical attacks, maybe there are concrete attacks that one could mount, but basically, yes, this is... yeah.


[Antonio Sanso] (12:41 - 13:19)
I just want to add that actually, from my perspective, at least this millennium prize kind of met the objectives. It was like in the span of one and a half month, we got more progress on the topic, more than one and a half month and in years of research.


And actually a little trivia, I guess, me and you, like the people that were in the room in Cambridge, seeing live how this idea was one of the first idea that actually... the first track on the conjecture actually was born, and that was actually pretty exciting.


I'm talking about, of course, about the retreat in Cambridge. That was amazing.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (13:19 - 13:47)
Yeah. And we've actually mentioned that in the first episode with Justin.


So this problem of ‘can I batch things and still have the right distances’ was sort of this proximity gaps problem.


There were 5 or 6 papers that came up pretty much within like 2-3 weeks of each other, all talking about this problem, showing negative, positive results.


What did they do? What does it mean?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (13:48 - 15:59)
So, yeah. There's been a lot of progress. There's been, I think, 5 or 6 papers. I actually have a list of them in front of me.


So the first one was this paper by Ben Diamond and Angus Gruen, which was closely followed by one by Elizabeth Crites and Alistair Stewart.


Then there was one by Eli Ben-Sasson, Dan Carmon, Ulrich Haböck, Swastik Kopparty and Shubhangi Saraf. Then there was one by Rohan Goyal and Venkatesan Guruswami. And then there was one with Sarah, Alessandro, Ziyi and Ignacio from our group at EPFL.


And all of them had slightly different results, which are kind of hard to survey together, but let us try to do that.


So before this explosion of papers, we basically knew the following.


So remember before I was talking about this fraction. So there is one value of this fraction, which is called the Johnson bound, which is a very classical measure in coding theory.


If the corruption is less than the Johnson bound, then we know the security holds unconditionally. So we know for the code that we care about for LeanVM and for SNARKs in general, we know that this construction is secure.


Beyond a certain other fraction, which is called the capacity, we knew the security cannot hold.


When the fraction of corruption is more than this capacity bound, then we know that no security can be guaranteed. And nothing was really known in the middle.


So this is the status quo before all this paper came out.


Then there were like the Diamond and Gruen and the Crites-Stewart papers. What this paper showed roughly was that the correlated agreement error, which is the name for this property of batching things, actually cannot hold somewhere like, which is... at a fraction of corruption, which is slightly smaller than the capacity value.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (15:59 - 16:04)
Okay. So it's inside the range where it was unknown until then.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (16:05 - 16:48)
Exactly. Exactly. So this is a quantity that corresponds roughly to the Elias bound, which is another classic information theoretically coding quantity.


This is close to the capacity bound, but far enough that actually this attack would degrade... this analysis would degrade the security of some of the deployments in practice by I think, if I remember correctly, it was 3 to 5 bits.


So if you deploy like a system with 128 bits of security, a conjecture security, then this would reduce it to 125 bits, for example.


[Antonio Sanso] (16:48 - 17:22)
Opening a parenthesis here, Giacomo, what surprised me a lot about, especially the second paper by Stewart and Crites, is that actually, surprisingly from my perspective, the result that they managed to achieve, they use a really old paper that is from 1964.


So you will expect this answer will have an answer that will use the modern technique. It's not like... they really use a really classical bound from the 60s. And this amazed me at the beginning.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (17:23 - 17:38)
Right. I guess at the end of the day, these are very fundamental problems of counting fractions of things, right? And when you start talking about counting things and looking at polynomials, then there's a whole depth of literature in mathematics that you can go and take from.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (17:39 - 18:29)
Yeah. And it's really, really beautiful as well. In a sense, it was not unexpected. We knew there would be a phase transition at capacity. So after capacity, everything would be broken.


So one of the questions that we had at this retreat in Cambridge was like, look, I cannot believe that one little bit below capacity actually I think will magically be safe.


There should be like a somewhat smooth phase transition between when we're secure and not secure, and these particular considerations were kind of like what guided some of these papers into these attacks to look at this boundary region and see what issues were to arise.


These were like some of the negative results, and then there's like some of the positive results.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (18:30 - 18:42)
So negative, again, we mean like within the unknown area, some part of it is actually unusable for security analysis. Positive results, I guess you mean on the other side, like pushing beyond what we knew?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (18:43 - 19:26)
Exactly. Exactly. And on that, so there was the paper by Eli Ben-Sasson, Dan Carmon, Ulrich Haböck, Swastik Kopparty and Shubhangi Saraf.


So they showed a lot of things. This paper is a kaleidoscopic paper. It has both negative and positive results.


But among the positive, they showed, for example, that for like Reed-Solomon code, which are codes that we particularly appreciate in proof systems, not only did the bound hold to the Johnson bound, as I was saying before, but they showed an improved error.


So that the bound up to the Johnson bound is actually like the error of this batching step is lower than what was previously thought.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (19:26 - 19:39)
Okay. So the result is positive in the sense that we get better errors than what we thought we had before. But it's not positive in the sense that we can use our analysis beyond the Johnson bound. We're still limited by the Johnson bound.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (19:39 - 21:03)
Well, yeah, for getting beyond the Johnson bound, actually, there was the first positive result. It was a breakthrough by Goyal and Guruswami. So for people who are like [?] Venkatesan Guruswami is an incredibly gifted coding theorist, one of the most celebrated that I know, like from the Guruswami-Sudan algorithm, among many, many other things.


I'll understate how many of the contributions in coding theory come from this camp.


And what they showed is that actually, for some specific families of code, and in fact for random linear codes, mutual correlated agreements or a strengthening of this batching property that I was talking about, actually hold almost up to capacity for this specific kind of codes.


So these codes are also very related to Reed-Solomon codes. They are either like folded Reed-Solomon codes, univariate multiplicity codes, or random linear Reed-Solomon codes, or random linear codes even, these are like the more extravagant ones.


Like, especially this random linear Reed-Solomon code is like, I'm going to pick a Reed-Solomon code as random, according to some procedure, and with that probability, it will have good properties for us to use.


So for these random codes, I would be able to actually prove security up to very close to capacity.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (21:03 - 21:04)
Okay.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (21:04 - 21:12)
So this is still... concretely, these asymptotic results are still missing a lot of things. We cannot use these random codes.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (21:12 - 21:15)
Right. Like we wouldn't have an efficient SNARK from these random codes?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (21:15 - 21:42)
Exactly. And even the folded codes, which are explicit codes, we've run the numbers, it doesn't really seem like they end up giving a practical benefits over just using the provable analysis for Reed-Solomon codes.


But this is like the first analysis to my knowledge, which actually manages to get beyond Johnson bound in any capacity for a correlated agreement.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (21:43 - 22:01)
Okay. So I guess there's still a lot of open questions in this area. There's still what kind of codes... we know that some codes go beyond the Johnson bound, but not the ones we're using right now.


But also the ones that go beyond so far are not like as efficient as the ones we have. So there's still like an open little area there, right?


[Antonio Sanso] (22:01 - 22:41)
Right. Just if I can quickly open a parenthesis about the paper I was mentioning before Giacomo of Eli Ben-Sasson [?], if someone is looking for a small project, even for students that are curious, this paper is full of Easter eggs for negative results.


So there are like a lot of failure of correlation agreements for special primes. It's like a lot of little examples that in my opinion can be extended a lot if someone can extend that for special families or primes. There are some weird corner cases and there are many little corner cases.


And in my opinion, if someone is looking for a nice little project to spend the weekend, it's nice.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (22:42 - 22:50)
Listen up, people. Is this just like something you would do pen and paper, or is this something you can do like numerical examples of and like I can code something up and try to find...?


[Antonio Sanso] (22:51 - 23:00)
It's a mixture of that, in my opinion. It's like it's really like with a bit of help, of course, like Sage or Magma will be better.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (23:00 - 23:13)
So you guys also haven't mentioned so far, but you've also co-authored a paper on the topic. It's not specifically about proximity gaps as far as I understood, but like a special case that is used in SNARKs?


[Antonio Sanso] (23:13 - 24:34)
Yeah. Basically like what we did, we're more focused on instances of STARK that are actually deployed.


Now, if you go back quickly on how STARK was used in the past, they had in mind that... they share the fact that they were working over bigger primes. So the field was like, I don't know, at the beginning STARK was using the same prime of a the size of elliptic curves.


So I was really happy with that. 256 bits, the primes I recognized. If you look like now the STARKs that are used in production, they are like either 31 bits or 64 bits. And for me, at the beginning, it was like a bit mind blowing that actually you could work on this prime field and still be safe.


But what we noticed with Giacomo and after we learned that we were not the first one that noticed this property is that the Elias bound that before was mentioned by Giacomo basically could be seen in a multifaceted way. Namely, usually you work over these small fields, but you actually work over extension fields because you need to work over...


For example, if you're working with the 31 bits prime, you want to work on the sixth extension field, fifth extension field, and so on.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (24:34 - 24:37)
Because we want our randomness to be at least 128 bits.


[Antonio Sanso] (24:37- 24:37)
Exactly.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (24:38 - 24:40)
We need more than one field element.


[Antonio Sanso] (24:40 - 25:42)
Exactly. So the first thing we noticed is that actually, in this case, there are multiple Elias bound because basically the domain that you're working on is over the base field, but you work over the extension field.


And basically, then you will have the multiple Elias bound. You have the Elias bound over the base field that is actually smaller than the Elias bound over the extension field.


So you're still working on the code over extension field, but with the domain, you sample over the base field.


And basically what happens there having this multiple Elias bound, well, weird things can happen and Giacomo start to apply a bit of a more theoretical framework there. And yeah, this interesting results came out.


Maybe Giacomo might spend a few more words, but basically we've seen that there was about 10 bits degradation of security for project that were using, for example, STARK over 31 bits.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (25:42 - 26:29)
And one thing which is interesting to talk about is attack and which is also similar to the Crites and Stewart paper is that we're not really attacking the property I was talking about beforehand. This property of batching claims.


If you do the security analysis for word-like protocols, there's another term that shows up in the [?] soundness analysis, which is related to a very classical problem in coding theory, which is the list size of a code.


So basically the question is like, I have like a corrupted codeword. So I have some fraction of the code which is corrupted. In how many ways can I complete this codeword by replacing the corrupted part to get a valid codeword? 


[Nico Mohnblatt] (26:29 - 26:38)
Right. So if I were to replace the errors with real symbols, how many valid codewords would be possible? 


[Giacomo Fenzi] (26:40 - 28:32)
Exactly. And depending on how many fractions there are, like if the fraction is very small, there's just not much I can do to get a valid codeword. So maybe there's only one single close codeword.


But once my fraction increases, this is where I become in what's called the list-decoding range, then there's many ways I could complete this codeword.


And so what our paper shows apart is that for a lot of these SNARKs, this error term, which depends on list size, is inherent.


And in fact, as part of the Proximity Prize, we're going to have two problems.


One of them is about bounding this mutual correlated agreement property that I was talking about before. And the other one is about the... by now 6 years old problem of list decoding of Reed-Solomon codes beyond Johnson bound. 


So we're going to have these two parts which are important.


And an attack, as Antonio was saying, we were using the fact that the list size of the extension field code can be related to the list size of the base code, and the Elias bound is like more effective in degrading security when the alphabet size, in this case, the field is small.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (26:40 - 27:56)
And so for practically-deployed system, this ends up giving you a better attack than before.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (27:57- 27:58)
Okay. So your paper describes a concrete attack?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (27:59 - 28:33)
Not concrete. So these are information theoretical, like they say, like an information theoretical way in which you can show that these protocols have less security.


It seems still plausible that like computationally it is unfeasible to find satisfying an attack to against the protocol. And I think it's a very interesting problem to look at directly. But this definitely degrades the security of the protocol from being information theoretical to actually being computational.


[Antonio Sanso] (28:33 - 28:57)
Just to connect to the first attack that Giacomo described at the beginning, for example, the Gruen attack, there you had like 3 bits of security and degradation. Here you have like additionally 10, basically.


And also that one was not constructive. They would say, okay, there is this degradation, but was not a constructive attack.


They say, okay, follow the steps.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (28:58 - 29:12)
I see. I have a very stupid question, which is, if we had our system, we thought it was 128 bits. Now you have a 3 bit attack, a 10 bit attack, we're still way above 100 bits of security. Why should I care?


[Antonio Sanso] (29:12 - 30:11)
So there is this psychologically threshold, right? I mean, we in cryptography, someone last time came from the... this came from, but basically we have this 128 psychologically threshold that we don't want to go under. Because if you start to say go under, say okay, 128, 120, 100, 80, when do you stop?


So we really chose to have like 128 bits... I think the cryptography world agreed that 128 bits is the number we want to stay at, right? 


I agree that if we are 125, it's not the end of the world, it's not really a real attack. But if we really want to stay on this, we want to call it psychological threshold, let's call it like this.


And after all this series of attack, it's clear that we want to stay on the 128 bits provable security.


So I think that at the moment, people gave up on the conjectural security because of all these things that happened, right?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (30:11 - 31:00)
Another like meta point, when you're deploying like a very large system, for example, Ethereum, and you might need to choose a set of parameters that you hope you will not have to change for the next like maybe say 100 years, then you like things which provably cannot give you surprises.


And in this hash based, the security in the provable regime is a very attractive, kind of landscaping that I can put my foot down and say like, look, we understand these things well enough that there will not be an attack if I use it in the provable regime.


So the small attacks that kind of shaken our confidence because before we also thought that in the conjecture regimes, we understood things well enough, but this turns out not to be the case.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (31:00 - 31:14)
Okay. So I guess that's the important part, right? Is we thought we knew things, and then within a month, a lot of security degradation was shown. And so we can't be confident that we know things anymore.


Is that mostly what it is?


[Antonio Sanso] (31:14 - 32:10)
Right. Indeed, let me take the time to shill a tool that has been developed by the cryptography team at the EF.


And basically, we have this tool that we try to compute the soundness of the zkEVM projects that is called this tool is called soundcalc.


And basically, at the beginning, we were supporting a conjectural cases. So we were actually... the tool per se, you can actually plug some configuration and having and I mean like the bits of security that are in the conjectural case, or at capacity or for Johnson bound or for unique decoding, but now like after all this series of attack, we actually don't support anymore the conjectural case. We stay either in the unique bound or on the Johnson bound.


So and we decided to give up completely on the conjectures, at least like soundcalc wise.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (32:10 - 32:25)
So guys, I think we're reaching kind of time. I didn't want to end the episode with a question about what comes next. You know what questions are left open for the security of post-quantum SNARKs, and even maybe for the Proximity Prize.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (32:25 - 34:03)
So this is a wonderful area, I could talk about this for a long time, because I think there's a lot of super exciting questions regarding the security.


So I think we can like kind of split them into very different buckets. So there's kind of the overall security of hash-based SNARKs and SNARK in general.


So this encompasses questions like, for example, Fiat-Shamir security. Like if I compile something in the random oracle, what kind of guarantees can I get about the overall SNARK?


So there's been a lot of progress on this. There's the security of recursion. This is incredibly interesting and important topic. This is like kind of security of the compilation process of taking an information theoretical tool like an IOP and then compiling it with Merkle trees.


Then there's the coding theoretic questions, which I think there's also a lot to do. In the Proximity Prize write up, we're calling these things the Grand Challenge. So there's the grand challenges like really understanding for Reed-Solomon codes, where does the phase transition happen? Where do we pass from somewhere where we can show security to somewhere where we have not showing security?


So this is like the grand challenge, but there's a lot of other interesting things.


So, for example, there's, you know, Reed-Solomon codes have been great, but there's another beautiful families of code like Spillman codes or Repeat-Accumulate-Accumulate codes. What kind of property do they have for mutual correlated agreement and list decoding?


Or what is that they have even? This is also not particularly well understood.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (34:04 - 34:07)
By the way, those are the codes using Breakdown and Blaze, right?


[Giacomo Fenzi] (34:07 - 34:08)
Exactly.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (34:08- 34:07)
Cool.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (34:07 - 34:08)
Another question is about the relation between primitives like list decoding and correlated agreement.


Does one imply the other or not? Is there like... we know from, for example, Crites and Stewart and like the Ben-Sasson, Carmon, S. Kopparty, Saraf and Haböck paper that there are some relations between the two, but it is... so, for example, proving MCAs seems to be as are Reed-Solomon codes as proving list decoding, which is a very well studied question, up to capacity, of course.


But we don't really have like nice, clean understanding of what's the relation between the two.


So these are also interesting questions. There is a question of like more proximity generators. This is something like Ale, Ziyi, Ignacio and Sarah have been working on.


There is this very nice paper by [?] Krashun and Kazanin on trying to exploit some properties of 2-adic fields to try to get better attacks on MCA. There's a lot of very interesting work, which I think can be done.


In a sense, there was a psychological barrier, as Antonio was saying in another context, that we didn't have the tools to do anything beyond capacity, beyond Johnson bound, sorry.


And now with this flurry of paper, it showed that actually there was a very interesting and deep area of research beyond Johnson bound and close to capacity where I think people can do progress.


So, and these are very beautiful. They're very cute questions about polynomials. And I find it's extremely fascinating that this is just like really just polynomials.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (35:47 - 35:49)
So you have plenty of work for the years to come.


[Antonio Sanso] (35:49 - 36:18)
And from... as well like this is the field of a hash-based proof system. Probably, you're already talking in previous episodes, but I mean, we have a new hash function we are using everywhere. It's like Poseidon, Poseidon2.


And this is a really central piece of the security of all the system. And yeah, we just put another million on actually the security of Poseidon that I think is going to be exciting.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (36:18 - 36:21)
Well, guys, thank you very much for coming on the show. It was a pleasure hosting you both.


[Antonio Sanso] (36:22 - 36:22)
Thanks a lot, Nico.


[Giacomo Fenzi] (36:23 - 36:23)
Thank you for having us.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (36:24 - 36:34)
Always a pleasure.


I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Anna, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Hector.


To those of you catching us on video, thanks for watching, and to our listeners, thanks for listening.