[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 1:22)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Nico and I speak with Wyatt Benno from ICME Labs. We cover how he got into ZK, specifically through the ZK HACK Discord and the Justin Thaler Study Group. We also discuss how this paved the way for ICME's future projects and the focus of their engineering work.


We discuss how they built NovaNet, a network built to coordinate between provers, before shifting their focus to bring ZK to AI with their work on ICME Preflight, that is guardrails for agents, as well as developing Jolt Atlas, a production-ready zero-knowledge machine learning framework that allows AI-powered applications to be verified or made private with ZK. This episode was a dive into agents, how ZK can lock in, and the opportunities for alternative forms of ZKML to emerge. So hope you enjoy.


Now Tanya will share a little bit about this week's sponsor.


[Tanya Karsou] (1:26 - 2:18)
Today's episode is sponsored by zkSecurity. Smart contracts have lost users billions of dollars to bugs. Zero-knowledge protocols are next.


And in ZK, the bugs are even harder to spot. A silent soundness break can let attackers forge proofs for years before anyone notices. zkSecurity is the first security firm dedicated entirely to zero-knowledge proofs.


They've audited the full stack – circuits, compilers, ZK VMs, and proof systems – for some of the largest projects in the space. They publish open research on ZK vulnerabilities, and they've stepped in on live deployments to rescue over a million dollars from broken trusted setups before attackers could drain them. If you're shipping a ZK protocol, don't wait to learn what's broken the hard way.


Head to zksecurity.xyz to learn more. That's zksecurity.xyz. And now, here's our episode.


[Anna Rose] (2:22 - 2:29)
Today Nico and I are here with Wyatt Benno, the technical founder of ICME Labs. Welcome to the show, Wyatt.


[Wyatt Benno] (2:29 - 2:31)
Hey, Tanya. Thanks for having me.


[Anna Rose] (2:31 - 2:31)
Hey, Nico.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (2:32 - 2:32)
Hello. Hello.


[Anna Rose] (2:33 - 2:58)
Wyatt, I'm excited to have you on the show. I feel like I've been tracking your project for quite some time. We interacted quite a lot in the past on the ZK Hack Discord, Novanet.


Your project had sponsored a few of our ZK Hack hackathons. But yeah, I think this is a great opportunity to understand a little bit more where you are coming from. Can you share, maybe just start, a little bit of your background and what led you to work on this?


[Wyatt Benno] (2:58 - 4:06)
Yeah, so I'm actually a serial technical founder. I've done a few companies of my own, worked with private equity and also venture capital firms before as a technical team member or founder of multiple companies. In 2021, I actually sold one of my companies over summer.


It was like an online office space. I was in Japan at the time and people were like, why would you want this online office space? A pandemic happened and all major universities in Japan ended up using it.


So the MRR was like a hockey stick. And I was acquired actually by a Swedish gamification company that summer. And I came back to Web3 and cryptography right after that.


And I found the ZK Hack Discord and all this other cool stuff. But actually, what really got me into it was Justin Thaler and also Jens Groth more directly in a professional setting. So on the Discord channel, there was a session going on over Thaler's book.


I would come every week, maybe one to two times a week and have these very in real life sessions, deep, very deep, deep, deep diving into his book and also questions that people might have had. Those were all done Eastern time in the US. And I asked him if he would be willing to do it in Asian time.


And he was like, yeah, sure. We'll do some sessions then. I feel bad for it now because he was probably so tired doing these three hour sessions with us.


[Anna Rose] (4:06 - 4:09)
Wait, were you getting like one on one sessions with him too?


[Wyatt Benno] (4:09 - 4:16)
They always start the same, right? You start with like 30 people and then it dwindles down to like three to four people near the end of it. So it's very, very good sessions.


[Anna Rose] (4:16 - 4:18)
The study clubs, the study groups. Yes.


[Wyatt Benno] (4:18 - 4:29)
Well, I think it's a lot of people come on not knowing like the basic stuff. And then they watch the videos, whatnot. But it's one of those things at the end, it's very, it gets pretty personal.


Like there's a very select group of people left.


[Anna Rose] (4:29 - 5:05)
Totally. So this is the ZK Hack Discord study groups that some of you might be familiar with. The Thaler study group in particular, I think was the longest running one.


It was like three years or something. He went through his book chapter by chapter, week by week, three times. So it's like a pretty dense book as far as I know.


And the people, like you just said, we'd have a big group join at the beginning and then go. I mean, sometimes I think these would last six months, eight months from what I remember. It was a channel in our Discord.


Which, do you know which cohort you were?


[Wyatt Benno] (5:05 - 5:51)
I think I was right after the first one. So it was pretty early on. I think he only did the Asian session one time.


So I was probably the first and last because it was, I think, pretty tiresome to be there at like 11 o'clock at night or whatever it might have been. But from there, like I actually, my co-founder is actually a professor too at the time. So we actually had this like professor arbitrage where I met him indirectly online.


Like, hey, we're doing something with ZK, can we share like our ideas with you? That's how kind of the company kind of started actually off different things. That's my technical background with ZK.


That's kind of how ZK piled. But on the other way around, the company was actually started off of Grant. And the Grant was actually one person who was on the advisor board of the Grant was Jens Groth.


I didn't know how important his work was then, but now thinking back, it was like one of the main ZK people.


[Anna Rose] (5:51 - 5:57)
You had Thaler and Groth like there as sort of advisors or at least like working with you closely at that at that stage. That's cool.


[Wyatt Benno] (5:58 - 6:34)
Yeah. So he actually approved that grant. He was at DFINITY at the time and we ended up building that.


It's kind of how this company got started was working off that grant directly. And from there, I learned about Folding Scheme. I was the first person who implemented Supernova Folding, which is this first NIVC folding scheme.


And then from there, we keep building this memory efficient space. I would say that we were very different from the beginning, though. A lot of people were focused on ZK for scaling blockchains.


We really wanted it for local client-side proving, memory efficiency, and these other type of use cases that I think were being ignored. Another one is privacy. We always wanted privacy very early on.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (6:34 - 6:35)
So ZK, ZK.


[Wyatt Benno] (6:35 - 6:50)
Yeah. ZK, ZK. Exactly.


ZK squared. Another thing, interesting to bring up is actually the Srinath Sethi has a monthly session with us. He comes a lot of months before Folding implementing directly.


So he's also very helpful as an advisor. We were able to directly ask him any questions we had.


[Anna Rose] (6:50 - 6:50)
Interesting.


[Wyatt Benno] (6:50 - 7:19)
Over a two-year plus period. And we'd still do the sessions monthly, and he shows up a lot of the time as well. But one final person I'd call out is Benedict Bunce.


I asked him directly at an event one time, like, what are the key things about ZK? He's like, it's all just polynomial evaluations. So it was pretty impactful.


I was like, oh, okay, it's that easy, right? It's all just polynomial evaluations. We can all do this.


But those, I would say, the four very early people who kind of helped me start doing ZK in a professional setting. Okay.


[Anna Rose] (7:20 - 7:34)
And then ICME Labs and Novanet. What is the relationship there? And kind of how did that happen?


Because I really knew, I think I really knew you, like, through the hackathons with this project Novanet. Yes. What is that?


[Wyatt Benno] (7:34 - 8:48)
Yeah. So ICME Labs is the company, and we have a few different products that we have experimented with and released and also done papers about. Novanet itself is based on the idea of having a decentralised prover network that is collaborative.


So there's various different proving schemes that exist in space, very different hardware settings that exist. And maybe these people come together and work together to have one final result. And at the time, everyone was doing like proof racing.


So we all want to race. Whoever's the fastest one gets all the money, they win the proof race. And this is the most efficient way to do all ZK proving.


But the way we were actually thinking it was slightly different. Like my proving scheme might be specialised for ZKML, it might be specialised for this one thing. And yours might be, you might have way better hardware than me.


Let's get together and work together and actually have economic incentive to work together. And that's kind of what Novanet was based on. It's this really like Shapley value centric proving scheme for everyone to get together and work together.


But in terms of like projects in making tokens, I feel like it's not a great idea for a lot of people to have tokens right now. So we put that on pause a little bit over a year ago to focus on the ICME preflights, which is our core product now. And the Joel Ellis paper was last summer is when that paper was released.


[Anna Rose] (8:49 - 9:05)
So yeah, Novanet for me has always sort of fallen into that category of Prover Marketplace. That was at least how I had sort of understood it at the time. There were a lot of projects that did kind of go live as Prover Marketplaces and to differing levels of success.


[Wyatt Benno] (9:05 - 9:38)
I think our goal was really about the researchers too. Like if we incentivise researchers to do research and push through this Novanet network, then like you have kind of a flywheel. You have a researcher come in who might have the best thing for watermarking, you might have one that does the best thing for ZKML, and they're actually getting money for doing this research and implementing the code because what you see is like a lot of papers are done and no one does anything about it.


You might have more papers, more papers, more papers, but now a lot of stuff is getting pushed live. So really having this incentive to go have researchers, implementers actually do it and make production type systems was kind of the core idea of Novanet.


[Anna Rose] (9:38 - 9:48)
I want to move on to sort of the more contemporary projects, but ICME Labs. ICME, what does that stand for? I've been really curious about this for a while.


[Wyatt Benno] (9:48 - 10:29)
Yeah, I think everyone is. A lot of people just say ICME. So it's like on these meetings, I'm like, oh, it's ICME, ICME.


Like no, it's ICME. And ironically, there's like also a group at Stanford called ICME. So it's, it's complicated.


But the naming itself comes from Internet Computer Me. So we're going to make the internet computer easy for people. And there's back in the Ethereum world from way back in 2000 whatever, the internet computer was a concept.


Dafini actually jumped on that as well and took the concept. So it's Internet Computer Me. And we're really the project, I would say the first thing we're doing is making like ZK easy for regular people.


So my founder was, had a legal background and some of the stuff we actually literally wanted to do with legal smart contracts through using ZK with folding schemes to get this like local proving. But that's kind of the backstory. Like we wanted to get ZK basically running everywhere.


[Anna Rose] (10:30 - 10:31)
Nice.


[Wyatt Benno] (10:31 - 10:53)
I think one other thing to note that I think is weird to say as well, like a lot of projects I feel in ZK are focused on like L2s and like the succinctness part of that. We are actually never focused on that at all. We were more focused on the privacy and local proving aspect, which I think we're pretty unique and early at.


There's a few different companies now that do it. But really like we wanted most of our stuff to run on people's devices directly.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (10:54 - 11:02)
So I guess that explains the focus on folding schemes and sort of these local techniques or like fast proving techniques.


[Wyatt Benno] (11:02 - 11:31)
Correct. You could actually use folding schemes to pick the step size for your computer as well, which I think is a very interesting trait. So if you do want like super fast proving on a gigantic machine, you can choose that step size and folding.


But if you wanted a very small device to run, you guys should choose a smaller step size at the cost of it takes a little bit more time to run. But you can actually do this kind of trick where you can choose the step size directly to match the machine specs. And to this day, I still think it's the best way to kind of deal with that.


If you're going to look at this like step by step IBC type folding.


[Anna Rose] (11:31 - 11:49)
Moving on then to the AI work, I'm actually curious, like where and why and when did you like make this shift? Was it like you started to use these AI tools yourself internally for development and then realised there was problem spaces there? Or was it like strategic shift?


Like, yeah, how did how did that come about?


[Wyatt Benno] (11:49 - 12:51)
So the Jolt Atlas work itself was quite a while back. We were working on the first version of it. I'd known about Jolt from the Thaler sessions back in 2022 or whatever it was.


I thought just like the just one lookup approach for AI was very fascinating. Right. If you have these lookup tables, you can actually do the nonlinear functions very directly.


And what people were doing before was kind of using Halo 2 and all this other crazy stuff to get these lookup tables work. But really like ReLU and all these things that come up in the AI world are very well done in lookups. And also Matmul itself, which in AI, there's this matrix multiplication that happens constantly.


And actually, it's kind of funny. The Thaler 13 paper had a really good way to go about it. And we just pulled that forward to those 2025 and started using it.


And it's weird because like people were doing GKR, right, like GKR from Modulus and these other companies who are all using GKR for AI, but there's actually a constant factor overhead for that. And you can actually just do this Matmul directly just with some check, which I think is a really interesting historical fact. Performance wise, it's very, very quick.


[Anna Rose] (12:51 - 13:04)
I want to dig in here a little bit on the connection between what is it, matrix multiplication, something that's useful in the ZK context, but is actually also useful in the AI context. Like how is it being used in each of these?


[Wyatt Benno] (13:04 - 13:17)
A lot of the inference and learning and all this other stuff for the AI is literally just Matmul. That's why it runs on GPUs. I mean, it's just a very basic function that you just run over and over and over.


It's actually over 80 percent of the computation where you ask an AI something. That's mostly what it's doing.


[Anna Rose] (13:18 - 13:21)
Matrix multiplications. That's the math that's happening.


[Wyatt Benno] (13:22 - 13:41)
Exactly. And then you throw in some nonlinear functions, and that's essentially what modern LLMs are. From the math aspect, it's actually not very interesting what's going on.


But I think when they first came out, people were like, oh, this is really cool and novel architecture. But it's still kind of like magic, right? Like it's only doing Matmul and these nonlinear things, but the output is very usable for everyone, which I think is just amazing.


[Anna Rose] (13:42 - 13:56)
Correct me if I'm wrong here, but wasn't like the matrix multiplication part of the hardware conversation, this idea of like accelerating ZK? When we, you know, back in 2023, 2024, there was a lot of conversations about hardware. Am I right here?


Was it like?


[Nico Mohnblatt] (13:56 - 14:05)
I think you mean multiscalar multiplication. Oh, there we go. Damn it.


Which back in the day was when we had elliptic curve commitments, like the main operation. Okay. So different math.


[Wyatt Benno] (14:05 - 14:15)
Yeah. I think MSMs were a big one. We actually did a WebGPU implementation of MSMs as well for like local proving.


It's still useful. So you can still do MSMs accelerated on your device.


[Anna Rose] (14:15 - 14:15)
Yeah.


[Wyatt Benno] (14:15 - 14:21)
But I do think that's like anyone who's using elliptic curves, that's one thing you do need to accelerate even today.


[Anna Rose] (14:21 - 14:26)
The MSMs, not matrix multiplication. Correct. Okay.


Well, glad I got the clarification.


[Wyatt Benno] (14:27 - 14:32)
Well, it happens to me all the time with MCP and MPC, like mixing all these AI words with the ZK words.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (14:33 - 14:42)
Yeah. So is Jolt Atlas different from Jolt or is it a variant on it? Is it your own thing?


Can you tell us a bit more about it?


[Wyatt Benno] (14:42 - 15:19)
It's a pretty big variant. We couldn't use Jolt directly because Jolt is based on RISC-V and we don't want to convert all this AI stuff into RISC-V to try to run it. It'd be like an even bigger headache and overhead for that.


But what we can do is say, hey, let's use ONNX rather than RISC-V. So this is the format that AI uses kind of natively. So it's not WASM, it's not RISC-V, it's its own special thing called ONNX.


And we could run a ZKPM. It's kind of a ZKPM. We're just going to say it is because it's easy to say it that way.


But it's kind of an ONNX-based zero-knowledge virtual machine. The core concepts from the paper, I would say, are a lot of the same. But we do have these other issues that we need to deal with, nonlinear functions being one main one.


[Anna Rose] (15:20 - 15:39)
Going back to that connection point, though, so I'm sorry I got kind of like distracted by the matrix multiplication term, but like, are there other things that you're seeing as like a connection point between like even what you would describe before where you like the folding somehow is useful in this context? Like, can you express a little more how these are being maybe used in a new way?


[Wyatt Benno] (15:39 - 17:04)
I think it's interesting because folding actually did have a gigantic win at the end of the day with a Nova blindfold. So if you want to have privacy in a lot of protocols a day in production, in industry, or even in papers, you just add Nova blindfold, a trick from the HyperNova paper, back in. So the Jolt team, I think, not too long ago also did this, the main Jolt project.


They added this Nova blindfold in, and now it's ZK, meaning like it's privacy-preserving. That's one of the few ZKPMs that are. And also with Jolt Atlas, we can do the exact same trick.


We can add in Nova blindfold. It's a very easy way for us to get privacy on top of what we're doing. So like for the AI aspect, there's just like really two cool things that ZK can do that no other technology can do.


One is sync verification, which is like, we can run these gigantic computations, but anyone can check in under a second. We use this for guardrails in ISME Labs. So the preflight project is all about guardrails.


We can talk about that a little bit later. The second thing is the privacy, right? If you have this process where we can run these guardrails, but I would need to take 10 minutes for me to run, it would take you 10 minutes to run, it's not very useful.


Moreover, if I have to give you my policy for you to double check it or my code or whatever it might be, it destroys the use case for a lot of the ZKML stuff. Most companies don't want to give these policies, guardrail policies, or this hidden local data over. So there's two things that I always want to drive home when I talk about.


Sync verification is a superpower. Privacy is also a major superpower of ZK that no other technology can really bring.


[Anna Rose] (17:05 - 17:11)
But why for AI? Sync verification, you just sort of mentioned the guardrails. Let's dive into like what that actually means.


[Wyatt Benno] (17:12 - 17:19)
I have so much fun speaking with people in the Web 3 AI space currently. Most of them use TEs, which is fine.


[Anna Rose] (17:19 - 17:20)
You mean Web 2 AI?


[Wyatt Benno] (17:21 - 18:57)
No, but Web 3 AI companies. If you look at most Web 3 companies, it's like, hey, what are you guys using? They're like, we're using TEs, which is hardware based type stuff.


But it's fun because when you ask them, like, hey, how are you getting that stuff on chain? Like, how do you get these TE proofs, these attestation proofs, which are relatively large, like on a blockchain? And sometimes they stutter, like, I don't know, or I need to ask my technical founder.


But very often they do also need to wrap it in ZK, in a process called ZK decap, or something like this, where they wrap these TE proofs to make them smaller to get on chain. We do something similar with AI for guardrails, but we're actually taking formal verification proofs. So we take natural language.


You say, like, hey, these are my guardrails that I want to run. And you just give us natural language. We convert that with a small model to formal logic.


And then this proof is once again, like, large, like, I can check it, you can check it if I give you the policy. But the SMT is what we're using, it's not lean, I'll talk about that in a little bit. But it takes a while for you to check this proof as well.


So it's a larger proof. We wrap that in ZK. So now anyone can check it, the policy is private, and you just fold these together multiple times over and over and over and check in under one second.


So with, like, agentic commerce, you can imagine it's running 1000 times in like a second, even or a few seconds. The way people are doing it right now is these heuristics or LLM guardrails or something called human in the loop. So you literally have to stop a transaction, say, hey, this looks fishy, someone check it out, stop and make sure it's going okay.


And for root like agentic speed, this is never going to happen. So what we do is we run these proofs at machine speed, and we fold them all together and say, hey, if you want to check, you can check it under a second, a machine can check it, a human doesn't have to do it. And the sync verification property is kind of amazing for that.


[Anna Rose] (18:58 - 19:14)
I want to actually like explain guardrails a little more clearly, because like, they're very human, they're like very much user focused from what I understood from the documentation on your site. So yeah, let's explain exactly what these are. And then like, let's walk backwards how you actually accomplish that.


[Wyatt Benno] (19:15 - 19:32)
Cool. So guardrails very generally are sets of rules you can give your AI agent for things to do and not to do. And one very basic use case we had from way back when we first started doing CKML was actually like, I don't want my money to be sent to North Korea, like prevent that from happening.


Don't send my money to bad actors. Very basic things like that.


[Anna Rose] (19:33 - 19:39)
Or add a limit maybe, something like don't spend more than a thousand dollars at any given time.


[Wyatt Benno] (19:40 - 20:03)
Yeah. Yeah, exactly that. I think it's interesting because now what people do is like they hard code, a lot of these wallet providers, there's hard code rules in and that's like, for usability, it's not great.


It's like, only spend $500, only send these addresses. And if you're an attacker, you can just change your address. So therefore, you're just getting out of the system anyway.


But with these AI guardrails, you can actually have natural language to find these rules and you can defend against that.


[Anna Rose] (20:03 - 20:09)
By natural language, you mean like, I don't want to be interacting with a certain product, maybe something like that.


[Wyatt Benno] (20:09 - 20:39)
So they're fact-based checks. So a good example is like an HR document that a company might have. It's like, these people will get a raise here, they can take a break whatever times per year.


And these are the type of rules that we're defending against. So think of like legal documents, HR or wallet policies. Don't send over this limit per day.


Only send to these type of actors. This is just fact-checking in AI, essentially, based on natural language. And it's very like direct, like we literally have people just like send random things.


And there's this battle testing progress that helps them get it defined clearly before they deploy.


[Anna Rose] (20:39 - 20:50)
Okay. Is it for blockchain related projects primarily, though? Like, do you need to have digital currency?


Is it more in that world? Or is it for like you just described, HR and legal, which is like very off-chain?


[Wyatt Benno] (20:51 - 21:27)
So our use case specifically is agentic commerce. So it's for the adversarial settings, the ZK is very important, right? There's some overhead to it.


If you didn't care about that, it's a chatbot. You don't really care if it goes off the rails a little bit, correct itself or someone could start a new session. But if it's something like, hey, I'm sending money, it's a million dollars, you will be willing to pay a little bit more time to wait for the ZK process to go through.


So adversarial settings is really where it shines. But there's other ones too. It's not just Web3.


You can imagine Web2 companies who have banking, finance, or even like company-to-company transactions can also use it as well.


[Anna Rose] (21:28 - 21:36)
Okay. So that's the guardrails. It's text.


And then you said like you basically convert that into machine understandable code?


[Wyatt Benno] (21:36 - 22:54)
Yeah. So Vitalik actually had a post not too long ago as well. But he was talking about something called Lean, which is very popular right now.


Before, you would have to be an expert to interact with any of these formal verification tools. You would need to normally be like a PhD or have a lot of time interacting back and forth with them. One way people do this is with Lean.


And this is you interact with your LLM to get these Lean proofs out. It's very effective. I think it's much faster than trying to do it by hand before.


The bad thing about this is it's interactive. So you're going with this Lean and LLM questions back and forth, doing something called tactics to make these proofs come out the other end. But there's other ways of doing the same thing.


One is called SMT. And this is more directed, one-shot out these like formal proofs. So what we do is we take this natural language and we give it to an AI and it shoots out this SMT file, essentially.


And it's called automated reasoning. And this is very well studied. One paper actually from not too long ago as well showed this is 88% effective and you can actually get up to 99 or 100% effective to convert from natural language to this formal logic.


And when you defend against that, it's 100% it's very, very good, right? What people were doing before is like heuristics and LLM judges and hard coding. These at best are like 80-ish percent.


So you can imagine having money or an aeroplane even or like anything that's important. You wouldn't want to get on a flight if it crashed.


[Anna Rose] (22:54 - 22:54)
You want 80%.


[Wyatt Benno] (22:54 - 23:21)
Yeah, it's just not what you want. So this process we can get up to 99% it's because we're using SMT and these LLMs to produce SMT. With Lean, it was actually shown it was only like 30% accurate.


So there's still more work to be done there. But another cool fact about this SMT, which is Satisfiability Module Theorem, is that you wrap it in ZK relatively easily, which is difficult to do with a Lean kernel for various reasons. But we're able to wrap it with ZK and now we have ZK-SMT, which makes it succinctly verifiable and privacy preserving.


[Anna Rose] (23:22 - 23:29)
Interesting. The paper you just mentioned, the one that showed this automated reasoning, do you can you just share that with us? We'll add it in the show notes.


[Wyatt Benno] (23:30 - 23:34)
Yeah, it's just called automated. Actually, I think it's neuro-symbolic something. Very long title.


[Anna Rose] (23:35 - 23:37)
Find it for us and we'll add it in the show notes to the link.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (23:38 - 24:04)
So just to summarise, we have a policy, Guardrails, gets converted by an LLM into like an SMT instance. And then you have an SMT proof that gets verified in ZK. Is that right?


Exactly that. Okay. And so then do we have to trust the LLM that converted the policy into the SMT?


And how much trust is that? I know you said like 99%, but how do I know that you run a good model to do this?


[Wyatt Benno] (24:05 - 25:30)
So this is what I think is interesting about the binding aspect of ZK more generally, right? You can run actually an SLM and do the same process yourself. And it's a smaller model.


So you can run like on your device or wherever you might want to do. So with these large models, with automated reasoning now, it normally runs on a cloud provider. You might not trust the cloud provider.


You might want to share this proof with third parties who also don't trust the cloud provider. And this is the case in agentic commerce more generally. But you can bind the result of your local asset to the larger result because they're both formal logic or they're both proving formal logic.


And you can actually share the SMT as well if you wanted to do that. So a good example is like, hey, that gigantic LLM said one plus one is two. My local LLM also said one plus one is two.


We match the answers and we're binding them together. So we have kind of this trust composability. But yeah, I would say the trust there is if you trust the cloud provider who's running the larger models, or you can run it locally to do the exact same thing if you want to and kind of bind those two results together.


Also, if you're an expert, you can verify the SMT yourself, just like check it before you deploy into production. And that's something we have to do, right? Like in production systems, we do do this battle testing where we have humans make sure their intent matches the formal verification files, which is just a different literature aspect altogether.


Like how do you match intent with formal proofs? And we do so need humans to come back in and say, hey, I sign off on this guardrail. This is what I wanted to do.


And then you can start using it for production use cases. And that's where you have it run a thousand times a second. We don't say like, hey, just do it and not battle test it.


We say, hey, do it and then battle test.


[Anna Rose] (25:30 - 25:48)
What does that battle testing look like? Is that actually like a back and forth? Is it sort of like, here's my guardrails, you send that off, it does it, it turns it into like this formal verified proof, it tests it, sends you back, is this what you wanted me to do?


And then you say yes or no. Like I'm trying to picture like how you even check that.


[Wyatt Benno] (25:48 - 26:04)
That's also super interesting. I posted recently on Twitter and it was pretty funny because people who are like experts in this space, like that's, there's so much that you're overlooking in this one aspect. You can do it like this, this, and this.


There's a bunch of different ways to do it. But the way we do it directly is actually just give you back scenarios on anything that's ambiguous.


[Anna Rose] (26:05 - 26:06)
Okay. Like the edge cases.


[Wyatt Benno] (26:07 - 26:31)
Exactly that. So if there's anything that wasn't seen, that's ambiguous or there's duplicates, so there might be two variables that are the same thing. We'll send you back scenarios and you basically just thumbs up or thumbs down.


And you do this over a few iterations. It normally takes most people like a minute or two. And it'll keep going back.


Hey, now we're 88 percent. We're 94 percent. Now we're 100 percent.


And that's when you know you're good to go. So it's not just satisfiable. It's also valid.


And these two results together are like, this is the policy guardrail that's ready to run.


[Anna Rose] (26:32 - 26:42)
Once that's accepted by the creator of the agent, does your technology then generate this final proof of some kind? Like, I'm kind of curious what that last step looks like and where does it go?


[Wyatt Benno] (26:42 - 26:49)
Yeah. You can actually run the verifier yourself because it's just like an open source Joel verifier for this stuff.


[Anna Rose] (26:49 - 26:49)
Okay.


[Wyatt Benno] (26:49 - 27:46)
But we do create a proof on each guardrail run. So every time you're running the guardrail, say like an agent has an action, it's running on your computer. It's like, hey, I'm about to run this file, open it up and do this thing, edit it or whatever it might be doing.


We stop it there and say, hey, wait one second, we're going to run this guardrail. After that clears this yes or no is when you get the ZK proof back. You might not need that directly yourself, but if you have an auditor later down the road who might be collecting thousands of these together, what people do nowadays is log everything because they're afraid that their agent might go haywire and someone has to go back and look through all these logs once again.


But the magical thing with the ZK guardrail is you can say, hey, you don't need to log everything only when the guardrail hits log something and someone can literally just go back and specifically verify the proof ran. And also if there was a need for it, go back and see which thing actually ran and passed the guardrail. For us, it's money, right?


So it's a little bit different. It's like, hey, my agent needs to send money or my agent needs to do something that's adversarial. And that's when you really want this cryptographic guarantee.


[Anna Rose] (27:47 - 27:51)
How do you stop the agent? How are you attached to this agent?


[Wyatt Benno] (27:51 - 28:08)
Every agent has its own way to stop it, which is kind of irritating. So we're unopinionated about that, but they all have their different things, right? I think like with Claude code, there's something called Hookify.


And what Hookify does today is it uses regex and it's like a coding file on your computer. And if I was an attacker, I could just change that coding file and kind of get past the guardrail.


[Anna Rose] (28:08 - 28:11)
It's like not a safe, not the best agent control.


[Wyatt Benno] (28:11 - 28:43)
Not the best, but it works really well for a lot of people, right? It runs locally. It's fast enough.


They can compose it whatever they want, which is fine for like non-adversarial settings once again. But for anything that would be adversarial, you use Hookify and you just plug us in right at that middleware layer and it runs on each time. Another thing you do is actually use a ZKBM, like bind the action with literally another proof if you want to.


Or TE, like you have the actions running and your agent might be on your computer, but the actions are actually running on trusted hardware somewhere else. So there's various different ways you could do it.


[Anna Rose] (28:43 - 28:47)
You just mentioned the Claude code example, but what are the other systems like?


[Wyatt Benno] (28:48 - 29:09)
Open Claude is another good one. There was an incident where there's a skill that like evolves your Claude code agent over time. So it's like literally evolving step by step with you to make it better.


But it was poisoned essentially with send this data to a server in China. So this is an example of like, hey, you can use these skill files for whatever, but a lot of them might have things that break guardrails.


[Anna Rose] (29:10 - 29:12)
That still would have broken the guardrails.


[Wyatt Benno] (29:12 - 29:26)
Depends on how you would run it. Right. Like if you would use a skill file, we would be vulnerable to the same attack.


If you're saying with a skill like, hey, use the guardrails every time. But if you actually sandbox your agent away and then you have these guardrails running as a middleware somewhere else, you would have that protection.


[Anna Rose] (29:26 - 29:33)
Okay. You'd be going through it. What about like any of the other agent stacks?


I don't even know what to call them, but.


[Wyatt Benno] (29:33 - 29:38)
There's so many agent stacks. It's ridiculous. There's Hermes.


There's so many, so many more.


[Anna Rose] (29:38 - 29:51)
Do you have to do integrations with each one? Like you basically, they come out, you're like, okay, how do we stop these agents when we need to? You have to find the mechanism to halt it, and then you somehow have to lock your guardrails into that.


[Wyatt Benno] (29:51 - 30:57)
Is that sort of the work you're doing? We let the agents do that, or the customers do that a lot. So everyone has their own way of doing it, and they already have their way of doing it now, which is interesting.


Right. So it's like, oh, we have this way of doing it. It's only 88% accurate.


We're just flipping that over to add the cryptography in where it's essential. And what I would say about that is like, it's, we're unopinionated in the paper that we should have coming out on this topic specifically. It's very clearly defines how you should do this, but we don't say like, this is the only way you can do it.


It's one of many different ways you can go about it. But versus people already doing things in production and versus what they're doing, I would say it's kind of a superpower to have a ZK plugged in and have the proofs coming out of it. But all these agents, like the Wild West right now with agents, just generally speaking, you see all these protocols going on.


They're mostly like reputation based and reputation is fine. Like you trust Visa, you trust whatever until it breaks. It's like, oh, I trusted that agent for this thing.


It lied to me this one time and stole all my money. It's like, go reputation. So that's like really approaching these companies and these people who are using it.


It's been pretty fun in a lot of different aspects.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (30:58 - 31:14)
By the way, do you still consider this like ZK powered guardrails to be ZKML or is that something different? Because I think people were using the term ZKML to like, oh, I'm going to prove inference or proof training maybe. But this is very different, right?


You actually don't even prove what the LLM is doing.


[Wyatt Benno] (31:14 - 32:08)
We're actually really weird people from the very beginning. We were into folding schemes for local programming. My opinion on ZKML always was we should do what's practical first and not try to do like the biggest and greatest LLM.


So a lot of the teams I was speaking to initially were like, we want to do chat GPT, the fastest thing ever. And it was always like, hey, let's do classification models. Let's do like SLM that run on people's machines.


So these smaller models that actually you do need trust for, right? A good example is like if you have a model running on your phone that does an iris scan. I think this is also from the WorldCore community, well, from the past.


You want that to be done on your local device. It has nothing to do with LLM. Like you want a ZKML that runs locally.


It does this proof and you prove for a third party I ran this model correctly and you can hand that up. So these type of use cases that are like local running with trust is where I was always more excited about. And in this case, we are doing some LLM, but they're just smaller, so-called SLM, small language models instead of the larger language models.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (32:08 - 32:16)
All right. So maybe I've misunderstood, but the guardrails is only for small local models. It's not like for I'm using some cloud-based large model.


[Wyatt Benno] (32:16 - 32:28)
So the guardrail itself uses Jolt to run the actual guardrail. So it has nodes. ZKML, the transformation process from natural language to the SMT is where you have some ZKML.


This is where you're binding the local SLM to the larger model.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (32:29 - 32:29)
Gotcha.


[Wyatt Benno] (32:29 - 33:20)
So this is, we have a little bit of everything in there and there is a paper coming out relatively soon. You might be able to get early access if you ask Albie for it, but it's with a major cloud provider and it's how I did a system before that was doing this without the ZK and just making it much, much better by adding in the ZK for various different reasons. As I mentioned, like logging.


One good example of logging is like Coinbase was paying Datadog $65 million to log information, which I think is insane, right? And they freaked out about like, hey, we should do this in-house. And eventually they made a deal with Datadog to do it.


But really, like most of the cloud providers are saying you should log everything right now. And I think from the cryptographer perspective, it's like, you're going to log all this stuff. Something bad is going to happen and you're going to have to go in and like find where it happened.


It didn't protect you anyway, because it's very reactive. Cryptography, more generally, though, is very proactive, right? We're setting rules up front for what these agents are able to do or not able to do.


I think the proactive approach is very good.


[Anna Rose] (33:21 - 33:40)
You mentioned your customers. You sort of said like, our customers. Who are your customers?


You also mentioned sort of your customers would implement these things. So are your customers OpenAI and the agent creators? Are you, is it Anthropic or is your customer a wallet or are they the users, the end user?


[Wyatt Benno] (33:41 - 34:26)
So the way we've been going about it more recently is we want anchor customers and generally large providers of these services to third parties already. So a cloud provider might have a million customers using some guardrails that they implemented, and we just want to make that much better and secure. So Stablecoin providers is a good example.


Stablecoin providers are some of our public companies. They need to know for a fact the agents aren't going off the rails and sending money to North Korea or doing these other bad things. And they have hard-coded ways of doing this, but we give them a cryptographic way to verify it as well.


But there's already customers who are doing other things that have nothing to do with Web3. They're using these existing guardrails that are, you have to trust the cloud provider and you can't audit very easily. And we just come in and kind of upgrade that system for them.


And then they're able to distribute these millions of customers that they already have.


[Anna Rose] (34:26 - 34:30)
Would you be like a tool within the cloud provider's tool set, potentially?


[Wyatt Benno] (34:31 - 34:52)
Yeah, we would be in the marketplace and also like directly integrated. And for like our type of company, most people don't know what ZK is. Most people don't know what SMT is.


And like going person to person trying to explain that would be very difficult. But if you have a joint paper and people are already using a product and there's just a better version, they're very keen to upgrade to the better version with better capabilities.


[Anna Rose] (34:52 - 35:06)
The proof that you're actually, the proving system that you're using to do the all of these proofs, I'm guessing is the Jolt Atlas, ZKVM, ZKML engine. I think you've called it both those things. They're the same thing, right?


[Wyatt Benno] (35:07 - 35:48)
So there's two. We did our own version of Jolt. So we're using Jolt for some things and we're using Jolt Atlas for other things.


Jolt Atlas is the ZKML variant of Jolt. One cool thing about this is ASYS and ZBACS Jolt. So they're indirectly, we always like the joke, they're indirectly funding us by maintaining and doing other stuff.


So like GPUs is one thing we want to do this year as well. So there's one goal that we have to have one GPU proving one CPU core in real time for the ZKML, which would be real time proving in a sense, right? And they also have a similar goal.


So we have now this like collaboration effort to get there. And one way we're thinking about doing is actually directly with lattices rather than using elliptic curves.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (35:48 - 35:56)
I'm glad you brought it up. I was going to ask. I remember seeing you guys being involved in porting Jolt to lattices.


So this is a great, great segue into that.


[Wyatt Benno] (35:57 - 36:23)
Yeah, definitely. I think one cool thing that people often overlook about EC and lattices is the homomorphism. And with all these folding scheme, like that was the one thing you needed to make them efficient at folding together.


You would have this homomorphism trait. A lot of the hash-based stuff essentially had to like find strange workarounds to make this stuff memory efficient and make the proof succinct. But there's a few traits of lattices that are very, very cool.


And one is homomorphism.


[Anna Rose] (36:23 - 36:27)
How do you add lattices to Jolt though? How do you like what's it replacing?


[Wyatt Benno] (36:28 - 36:40)
You're taking out the elliptic curve in the PCS. So the following commitment scheme, some people use Dory there, some use Hyrax for the Jolt versions. And you're taking that out and replacing it with a lattice-based PCS.


[Anna Rose] (36:40 - 36:50)
And which one? What would that be? Is it like this Neo or something?


Is it the work of like Srinath? These systems are now being kind of like put in in the place of Dory.


[Wyatt Benno] (36:51 - 37:26)
So we're taking some things from Srinath for the ZK aspect of it. So lattices themselves aren't privacy-preserving and we want to make them privacy-preserving. So the trick from the NOVA blindfold paper or the NOVA blindfold trick, we're trying to make that apply to the lattice setting.


And we have some notes coming out on that relatively soon. But making this up ZK, we did pull some tricks from folding scheme more generally. But other works on our team as well, there's one called ABBA, which is just making all the stuff more efficient.


Nico might actually know more about the fine details there than I do, but it's very deep in the weeds on the math of lattices to make it more efficient.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (37:27 - 37:31)
It is. Is there a presentation at ZK Summit as well? Yeah.


Did I misremember?


[Wyatt Benno] (37:31 - 37:35)
Oh, there was the other one. Or ZK Proofs maybe. Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (37:36 - 37:47)
Oh, you did ABBA at ZK Proofs, you did Jolt Atlas, I think, at ZK Summit. We'll link to all of these videos because we have those up now. So I think I understood how you're adding the lattices.


[Wyatt Benno] (37:48 - 38:18)
One of the cool things, they fit inside GPUs natively. So with these lattices, you actually have smaller field sizes. So I mentioned that we did like WebGPU in the past for these MSMs. And what we would have to do is convert from the CPU to the GPU. And there's this gigantic overhead when you're moving the data back and forth. But potentially with lattices, you can just run these things directly on the GPU, removing this overhead time. And then you can have, like I mentioned, one GPU proving one CPU kind of in real time.


So that's another cool thing about small fields and things that lattice can do.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (38:19 - 38:23)
Including on like small devices or like local, I guess, devices?


[Wyatt Benno] (38:23 - 38:34)
It should work pretty well on most devices with GPUs directly. This field size is the same no matter what, right? Obviously, like if you have a gigantic GPU, it's going to be faster on that in any case.


[Anna Rose] (38:34 - 39:13)
I want to go back to the folding itself. So we've covered folding a number of times on the show. I think most people are familiar with it.


And I think you may have already explained where you're using it maybe 20 minutes ago when we were kind of going through the steps of the guardrails. But I'm still like not exactly clear on like why does folding matter here? Like is it like are you yourself batching like all sorts of guardrail instructions together using folding?


Or are you sharing with other people? I'm assuming not, but like non-client side, like on some server, you're folding everything together. Like, yeah, maybe you can just explain where the folding is happening.


[Wyatt Benno] (39:14 - 39:48)
Yeah, so Jolt actually, there is in the Jolt community, I wouldn't even call it a community, in the Jolt Telegram group, there is two different ways about going about space efficient proving for Jolt. One was like a streaming prover that the Jolt team went for and they actually implemented. And the other was like folding these Jolt proofs together.


And we've always been a fan of that one for a few different reasons. But what we can do now is say you're running your guardrail and it might run a thousand times per whatever minute. If you have to check all these proofs, it's still pretty cumbersome.


But what you can do, since they're all similar proofs, is just fold them one by one by one and have one succinct thing at the end to check that everything went well.


[Anna Rose] (39:48 - 39:52)
Would it be like at some time limit, it would like produce this final proof?


[Wyatt Benno] (39:53 - 40:20)
You could just keep going and stop anywhere. That's what the IVC, like intramedical verifiable compute thing is. You can just stop it whenever you want, check it, and then continue the progress going forward.


And for an auditor, like we were talking about logs earlier, like if you're an auditor and you know this rule is like has been checked off by a human, it has these very specific facts. So it's fact checking these agents with very specific things and you check the proof at the end. It's just much easier than going back and trying to go like a thousand different proofs, check each one over and over and over again or check the logs in a similar fashion.


[Anna Rose] (40:21 - 40:42)
Is it creating a proof per log though? Like you were sort of saying like you don't need to create as many logs only when it hits the guardrail, but like what you fold in, is it all of the logs still? Like are they hitting somewhere or is it only the guardrail hits and then you kind of compress those into a, I know you're not supposed to use the word compress, but like you basically like fold those into a single proof.


[Wyatt Benno] (40:43 - 41:32)
So logging in the AI world is literally like the back and forth from the user to what the agent said. So you can like ask a question and somewhere in the world, a Chattopaddy server is like logging that so someone can check at a later date. And there's a lot of text.


It's a bunch of text based data. If you do this, it quickly explodes. Like people talk to their agents constantly in very long sessions for a bunch of different things.


What we argue though for these adversarial settings is that you don't really need to do this if you have a cryptographic way of handling it. So at the end of the day, you say, hey, there might have been something that we want to check. It only happened when the guardrail broke and we logged that one interaction with the user.


Send my money to XYZ. We blocked it for this reason. And we'd log those textual things.


And also here's a proof that you can just run in a verifier and also check that all these guardrails before it ran correctly.


[Anna Rose] (41:33 - 41:49)
But again, like, is it just so is it just the when it hit the guardrail is like what actually ends up in this proof. And it's not every time it hits a guardrail, but like a collection of these hits of guardrails that would be then put together into one proof. I'm sort of thinking of it like batching, but I don't know if I'm.


[Wyatt Benno] (41:50 - 42:14)
Yeah, it's kind of like batching, right? At each guardrail, it's a satisfiable or unsatisfiable. And this is like it worked or it didn't work.


And we're doing this over and over and batching them all together. But the moment it said unsatisfiable is like you might want to check that. Right.


Like for whatever reason, the agent is doing something bad, is sending money to someone. You might want to stop it right there and make sure the transaction doesn't go through. And you might record why at that point rather than recording all the ones are OK.


[Anna Rose] (42:14 - 42:22)
How is that flagged for the customer, the consumer or the user of this? Like does your technology trigger something like an alert or something?


[Wyatt Benno] (42:22 - 43:29)
Yeah. So in the AI world, there's something called observability. And this is I actually went to SF and talked to a bunch of AI labs.


I'm like, what do you guys do now? And like we have these observability dashboards where a human like looks at it all day and make sure the agents aren't doing crazy stuff. So they're observing their agents and there's companies that are doing this and building like making millions of dollars, like even hundreds of million dollars.


There's also companies that are doing guardrails based off of observability. One was acquired last year for $500 million. And in my opinion, these are all just shittier ways of doing what we're doing.


It's interesting. It's like a human in the loop for commerce will never work because really these agents are moving at speeds we can't even comprehend. And you could have my agent interacting with your agent and we're going to go buy an aeroplane ticket or do something like this.


And to check all these third party integrations, not everyone's going to integrate one thing in. So you do want to have like this thing for your own guardrails like, hey, this is my intent in my natural language and my agent did protect against my personal intent for that. Not a big fan of observability, but yes, you can absolutely see on a dashboard like, hey, this guardrail failed.


Here's a log why it failed.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (43:29 - 43:41)
And then is there a way for these systems to recover from a fail? Like, okay, my agent has a guardrail. I now have proof that I was protected by my guardrails.


Is that the end of the interaction or can my agent keep going and doing its thing?


[Wyatt Benno] (43:41 - 44:32)
That's where the whole reputation comes in, right? So in the Ethereum situation, there's like ERC 8002, I believe is what it's called. And at that point, the agent would be like not trustable anymore.


The identity of the agent is now known as a bad actor and you would have to like clear the context memory and make a new agent. And the whole point of that ERC is like, hey, these agents are running over a long time, so they should always have good reputation. And if not, we should stop that agent, like we shouldn't use it.


And the weird thing about that is like most agents who first made have no reputation. So you're just trusting something that has no reputation anyway. But in the ideal world, you'd be like clear the context and you'd reboot the agent to where it should have been in the first place and you do that with like memory or these other tricks.


But all agents, they're probabilistic. So they're always have a probability of having an issue no matter what. And we're really bringing in the mathematics to make that more cryptographic rather than the probabilistic.


[Anna Rose] (44:32 - 44:38)
You just mentioned that there are other companies building guardrails. How are they doing it? Why is your way better?


[Wyatt Benno] (44:38 - 45:33)
Oh man, it's horrible. It's it's pretty crazy out there. So one really interesting but one not so great way of doing it is something called LLM judges.


So you have your LLM that you want to defend and then you have a third party LLM look at it and say, hey, is this thing going crazy? Is it sending money to bad actors, what not? So you have like rather than having a human do this, you have the LLM kind of judge in.


But there's something called a prompt injection attack, which basically is like I'm going to trick your agent by sending it some funny text, and it's going to send the money no matter what. So it could be like hidden in a file. It could be direct, like I could just be sending it like text or it could be hidden like emails and other very tricky ways of doing it.


If you have an LLM judging an LLM, you can just do the same thing at the top level, right? So it's just like passing the ball up and saying, hey, I hope we're OK this time because there's another LLM judge protecting against us. And in many real world examples, these just fail directly.


Just as game of LUL was the first LLM.


[Anna Rose] (45:33 - 46:01)
That sort of like LLM org chart with the judges and the managers and checkers that sort of reminds me of this episode I did last year with David Wong from ZK Security, who Nico works with, where he had built out sort of this agent org chart, but of course running like owning it all. So there's ideally no malicious actor in there. In this case, these judges, like who's running them?


Like where where are they? You would run your own?


[Wyatt Benno] (46:02 - 46:56)
You could run your own. You could run it wherever you want, or you can have a third party run it for you. Or you can like have an SLM on your phone, even do it.


There's a bunch of different ways of doing this judging process. But I think the key about that is just like very easy to go to market with that, right? It's easy to do.


You can build this project, maybe using AI by coding tools and get it out there very quickly. I feel it's very similar to like having TEs in the Web3 spaces. It's very easy to run a lot of stuff on TEs.


So most companies are using TEs. So most companies, since it was easy to deploy. They're doing this LLM judge type thing.


For the deep tech, though, like having cryptography or something that's a little bit more protective, it takes more time to develop it and deploy it. So most companies aren't even aware of cryptography yet. Go to the AI lab and say like, hey, who are the cryptographers?


Like where are they at? And they always have a fun time answering, like we have none or we don't really know what ZK, FHE or any of this stuff is. It's always fun to kind of add that back into the mix with those conversations.


[Anna Rose] (46:57 - 47:06)
What else differentiates what you're building from these other guardrails? Do you have a privacy aspect or not, given that there's the ZK there?


[Wyatt Benno] (47:07 - 48:37)
Yeah, all of these people assume that you're interacting with the service provider or the guardrail provider and you trust them. So it might be a cloud provider that you're on their platform and you trust them directly. In Agenda Commerce, you might want to show to a third party that you ran this guardrail and they don't trust this cloud provider.


They don't trust this third party whatsoever. And to do this now, you'd have to hand over the policy and have them run the same process over again. Like this guardrail ran for this reason, did this fact checking, A, B, C down the list and then they could start trusting it.


But you might not want to share your policy as a company. You might want to say like, these are my rules. One example is the North Korea example.


These are the addresses we're avoiding. The moment you make that public, like they're obviously just going to use a different address. So what we can do with ZK is hide the policy saying, hey, you don't need to trust the cloud provider that they're using or the service provider of the guardrails, but you can verify this proof as a third party at the end of the day.


We know for a fact it didn't go to some bad addresses or we know for a fact that the specific guardrails were without exposing all the policy. So if you're a bank is another good example as well. You're not going to expose your customers' private balances or these other things.


But with the current systems, you would have to do that. You have to take these logs and show them to an auditor and the auditor would have to go check and make sure the balances are correct and this type of stuff. So the privacy from the ZK aspect there is, hey, the policy itself or the data that's put into the inference is private.


But yeah, ZKML is interesting because privacy is actually one of the most essential things for it. And without the privacy, it's not as useful as it would be otherwise.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (48:38 - 48:43)
Are there plans to use Jolt Atlas and the stuff you guys are building in other places than in guardrails?


[Wyatt Benno] (48:43 - 49:56)
So there's actually researchers who started using it in various universities around the world. It's been pretty interesting because ZKML has three separate powers, right? You can hide the inference input and make that private.


So this is like your private bank account data, your policy, whatever it might be. But you can also hide the weights. Companies spend millions of dollars training their AI and you might want to hide the weights after spending all this time and money.


But you can also hide the model as well. So there's three different things that you can do with it. And hiding the model is important because you might be like Chats GPT or OpenAI, Cloud, whatever the company's called.


You might spend tonnes of money, like insane amounts of money in compute and you don't want to expose that to third parties. Or you can have like your own personal AI running on your own device that you fine tuned yourself and has private data in there and you don't want to expose that model or that data to third parties. So this SLL interrupt, I think has been very interesting in terms of ZK.


I always imagine like Apple or another big company using this stuff as well because they do have, even currently, AI running on your own device with private data and actually use FHE to interact with a larger LLM elsewhere, but you can imagine this for like biometrics or other things that might run on device that you want to hide the inference or the model or the weights themselves.


[Anna Rose] (49:57 - 50:01)
In the case of your ZKML engine, what are you hiding?


[Wyatt Benno] (50:02 - 50:43)
We can actually do all three. So we're in the upcoming paper, we're able to do all three and there's a very cool trick that lets us do the model. I think it was open in the literature, actually, there's one team that claimed they were able to hide the model a little bit over a year ago, but then they removed the paper, which was unfortunate because we're like, this is a really cool trick.


We want to use it, but they probably found a bug or an issue. But now we're able to hide the model as well. So you can do it for all three.


The weights, I would say one thing is like ZKML is not for training AI. So you're never going to be like ZKML training. If you hear that, it's probably something way, way, way in the future, I can imagine.


Because training is very computationally heavy compared to inference. So we're mostly speaking about inference and the models and weights that are involved with that.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (50:43 - 50:46)
And small models for now, but maybe bigger models one day.


[Wyatt Benno] (50:47 - 51:38)
Very soon, bigger models, like if you have to compute now, we could do it. Like it's always, people are always very bearish on everything. Two years ago, people were like real-time proving of Ethereum blocks.


That's insane. Now it's done like four seconds. I think ZKML has the same trajectory.


People were so stuck two years ago. So when I talked to people like, oh, it's gonna take you five minutes to run that, right? And like, no, we're not using this older technology.


We have this brand new tech and it's actually done like four seconds for a lot of these use cases. So for this real-time proving, like if you had 64 GPUs and it was an SM, you can do real-time proving today with a lot of compute. But more realistically, like you could probably do LLMs. I think there's already teams that are doing this for government contracts that are not us. They're already doing this gigantic compute to do LLM and they already have demonstrated like this is possible right now if you have to compute and it's just a matter of getting that compute down a few orders of magnitude to make it more practical for most people.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (51:39 - 52:03)
If we have a bit of time, I'm still curious to dig into the technicals of Jolt Atlas. So you said Jolt architecture, we have this like one look up pretty much. The commitment scheme is still moving between elliptic curves as it is now and lattices coming soon.


How does that compare to, I know a lot of people were like doing GKR and they were saying GKR is the way to go for lattices. You mentioned that earlier and you mentioned there was a downside. Could you tell us a bit more about it?


[Wyatt Benno] (52:04 - 53:32)
So I think a lot of people are attracted to GKML because there is, you don't commit to the layers in between, as you can imagine, like a starting point and then like a web graph of different connections at the end, you have the output. And this commitment cost reduction is what I'm pretty sure a lot of people found attractive about it. But there's actually a constant factor overhead for this whole process.


And if you're doing Matmul, like your biggest claim is like, hey, we want to do matrix multiplication really quickly using GKR, you still have this constant factor overhead. But if you just go back even further in time to Thaler 13, you have a different way of doing it that doesn't have that same issue. And we were able to do that.


I think most teams actually converted from GKR to doing this like batched sum check type approach. So people are still using GKR for certain things, but I think most people have now for Matmul come to the conclusion that this batch sum check is the way to go. What we all disagree on still is like nonlinear functions and floating point numbers and this type of stuff.


Projects vary a lot on these details. And the academic literature, people still use EZKL and Halo 2, which is, I think, just an artefact. If you go to the GitHub as like a million likes, this is a very well-known repo.


And more recently, people will start using RSOF in the literature as well, and you'll probably see it referenced a lot more. But yeah, GKR was the way a lot of people started. I think Modulus was one of the first times I heard about it, maybe in 2022.


And they're actually acquired like super quickly, which I thought was pretty interesting. So they built like ZKML and they were acquired by WorldCoin. But yeah, batched sum check seems to be the way to go recently.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (53:32 - 53:34)
And no folding, except for ZK.


[Wyatt Benno] (53:34 - 54:17)
Yeah. So that's a fun trait as well, right? Nova blindfold is now like the de facto standard for adding privacy back in.


And you do have folding if you want to aggregate proofs, it's a very effective way to aggregate these proofs together. And Jolt Atlas itself, we don't use it other than adding in privacy. And this is an artefact from the Jolt team themselves also doing streaming proving rather than doing folding proving.


So we already have like space efficient Jolt Atlas by streaming if we want that. But what I can imagine later on is that we could fold some of these things together as well. There's so many tricks in the ZKML land that everything ends up being used at the end of the day.


Even both from the ZK world and also the AI world. There's just a ridiculous amount of tricks and tools that are still vastly unexplored.


[Anna Rose] (54:18 - 54:36)
I think you probably already did this earlier in the episode, but I'm blanking on exactly what's the difference between Jolt and Jolt Atlas. Sorry to go back to start here. Because you totally talked about the difference where they are in the stack.


But like, I just realised I'm like, wait, what is the difference again? So what is the difference?


[Wyatt Benno] (54:37 - 55:17)
Jolt is a ZKVM based on RISC-V. So a lot of people who are scaling Ethereum love RISC-V. They are making a bunch of different ZKVM for RISC-V proving.


And Jolt was one variation of that. Like, let's use this one lookup table to very efficiently prove RISC-V via a ZKVM. And this is some checks, very much Justin Taylor does have some checks, NSMs, lookup tables and all this great stuff, right?


Sparsity aware is another good thing. OK, but Jolt Atlas itself is like, hey, we can't use RISC-V for AI or ML operations. It's not the lingua franca there.


It's completely irrelevant. What we use in the AI space is something called ONIX.


[Anna Rose] (55:17 - 55:19)
This is where we're talking about ONIX. OK, got it.


[Wyatt Benno] (55:20 - 55:45)
This is where ONIX comes in. So we're not using WASM RISC-V, we're using ONIX as the trace proving. And this is how we get from the beginning to the end in the ZKVM world, kind of as a Jolt variant.


And we couldn't just like change Jolt, obviously, because it's very RISC-V. We had to make our own version, essentially, with a lot of the same stuff. So we have the Jolt, I would say, engine powering it, but we have a lot of stuff on top of it that's the ZKML specific work that we do.


[Anna Rose] (55:45 - 55:50)
And that work that A16z is doing, are they also working on this Jolt Atlas or are they doing something else?


[Wyatt Benno] (55:51 - 55:58)
Definitely no. They're working on a lot of stuff that's just like very, I would say, helps us out a lot. So adding privacy back in was one of those reasons.


[Anna Rose] (55:58 - 56:03)
But all on Jolt, like the focus of their work is the Jolt sort of underlying libraries. OK.


[Wyatt Benno] (56:04 - 56:07)
Yep. They're not doing third party stuff for free.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (56:07 - 56:29)
Got it. Actually, this is a good point. How do you separate RISC-V from Jolt, right?


Because Jolt is this one lookup and it's built specifically for RISC-V. Like, how do you do one lookup for ONIX? So it's actually not one lookup for ONIX.


And Jolt is also not one lookup, right? But it's, you know, simplifying, making a sketch.


[Wyatt Benno] (56:30 - 57:35)
So really what we do is like there's a bunch of functions, we'll just call them opcodes to make it easy for people who understand ZK themes. In ONIX there's a bunch of opcodes and they're either linear functions or nonlinear functions that you have to run over and over in various LLMs. Each one of those we have a lookup table for and these are run and batched together in a very similar fashion that the main Jolt work is done in. But I would say each one of these is its own thing.


Actually, at one ZK summit, I think someone was talking about ZKML more generally and I spiked in the conversation about Jolt having this decomposability trade, which is just really good for this type of lookup tables. But more generally speaking, I think there's also work on floating point that needs to be done. Most people, we take floating point and we make it fixed point for ZKML and we're still doing this.


But potentially with this lookup centric architecture, you could actually do some floating point directly as well. I believe there's one paper on that last summer as well, just using Jolt directly for floating point. I'm not sure how practical it is today.


But in terms of quality of the agents themselves, most people actually use these fixed points rather than the floating points for local SLM and stuff like this.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (57:35 - 57:39)
So is there still a lot to be figured out on that front?


[Wyatt Benno] (57:39 - 58:15)
I would actually say from the AI land, we have a few other people who work with us. So neural teleportation is a word that doesn't exist in ZK at all, but now it might via this podcast. But let's say it's just a trick.


You can actually take these very large lookup tables and actually make them very small and still preserve accuracy. And this is something from the AI world that they use for pushing this stuff into production on smaller servers. And we just took that and we moved it to the ZK space saying, hey, this gigantic table would take a really long time for us to run.


Let's use neural teleportation, make it smaller, preserve the accuracy and actually be able to improve on it much more efficiently.


[Anna Rose] (58:17 - 58:19)
Neural teleportation is the word? That's great.


[Wyatt Benno] (58:19 - 58:20)
I'm pretty sure.


[Anna Rose] (58:21 - 58:22)
And it's for lookup tables?


[Wyatt Benno] (58:23 - 59:08)
Now it's for lookup tables. Now it's applied to lookup tables. But the person we actually first met was actually also at Imperial who was doing that research and we're like, hey, that's really cool.


Let's take that and apply it to ZK. Because we actually use this like making the table smaller thing directly in the ZK world. But there's a lot of tricks that are coming from both directions.


I think for us, we're looking at making lattices ZK and then we're going to make them succinctly verifiable as well. And then hopefully have GPU powered. But another thing we're looking to do more recently is isogenies, which I think are just trending in cryptography.


But maybe it's like folding. We'll come back into that a little bit later as well. But these are the two things in terms of like the hardcore tech in the back end that we're looking for for the next 10x in performance speed.


But a lot of these other things are just engineering and also from the AI world rather than the ZK world.


[Anna Rose] (59:09 - 59:19)
Who and like what kind of group are working on the isogeny stuff? This is actually like me asking you for maybe recommendations for future podcast guests. But like, yeah.


Where do I even look for this?


[Wyatt Benno] (59:20 - 59:40)
My Simulab says Alberto, who Nico also knows, he actually went to Okinawa recently for a big summit, which I think was fun. I'm like, where are you at? He's like went all the way around the world to Okinawa.


And there's a summit of all the isogeny experts. But I think the thing there is like there's still a bunch of unresolved issues. So I would say it's like they made a version not too long ago and it was broken.


[Anna Rose] (59:41 - 59:45)
We know that. And I think we covered that on the show before it was broken.


[Wyatt Benno] (59:45 - 1:00:23)
So like that's where they're at now. But the cool like you have elliptic curves, right? And everyone's afraid that they're not post-quantum secure, but then you have isogenies that are plausibly post-quantum secure.


But we don't know. Yeah, but they probably are. Right.


And the thing is, like, they're just very hard to prove. Like there takes a lot of time to do this proving. But what you might be able to do is have the fast stuff run on lattices and then port over when you want succinctness to isogenies to have kind of this back and forth between the two things for the various traits of the two systems.


And both are plausibly post-quantum secure. So at the end of the day, you would have these elliptic curves finally used for PQ systems as well. But or you can do it directly with isogenies, which I think would be cool.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:23 - 1:00:35)
What kind of math is underlying isogenies? Like, isn't it completely totally different, right? We covered it many, many years ago.


I don't really remember. Wasn't there like these two spaces and they're interacting across? OK.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:00:36 - 1:00:48)
Yeah. So there's two elliptic curves. And I think you're finding similarities between the two curves, essentially, in two different spaces.


But I'd like to mention that we're like, elliptic curves are dead. I always just like say, no, isogenies might come back and save everything.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:48 - 1:00:50)
Wow. Cool.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (1:00:51 - 1:01:10)
So quite a few months ago, we had an episode on is ZK dead? And we talked a bit about ZKML and Tarun was very bearish on the case for ZKML. And following that, you very promptly tweeted, Tarun, let me prove you wrong.


So I'm glad we have you here, actually, to do that. I'm wondering, have we covered...


[Anna Rose] (1:01:10 - 1:01:13)
Sadly, Tarun's not on here, but we'll send it to him.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (1:01:13 - 1:01:23)
We need around three. But yeah, have we covered sort of all the exciting ideas that you think make a bullish case for ZKML?


[Wyatt Benno] (1:01:23 - 1:02:32)
I, the way I like to argue it is that the vintage of ZK is ripe, or ripe even now. You might have had these things processing over many years, and you're seeing them being used in real world use cases just more recently. So a good example is like when open AI started, it was chosen, whatever, seven years before it took them seven years to make the base tech to finally release chat2BT.


And with ZK, a lot of the early focus was on, hey, let's scale blockchains. It's all about scalability. We don't really care about privacy or local proving.


Things went from very slow to very fast over a short amount of time. And that thesis for investors was kind of like, hey, we're all gonna have tokens, they're all gonna be L2s. And in that sense, there was a lot of money put in and the results were not as great as a lot of people wanted.


But for the real world use cases now, like guardrails and Google using it for things people were using directly, these actually are arguably more powerful than the original vintage was. If you're doing this cryptographic guardrails, you're protecting hundreds of millions of transactions that people are already using worse guardrails. So I think ZK has come of age and it's right now is probably the most interesting time to actually come back in as someone investing or looking in the space just more generally.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:33 - 1:03:21)
I mean, I love to hear this, Wyatt. And I also really like your metaphor of ripening. And now I'm thinking like fermentation and wine and you just mentioned the vintage.


This is lovely. I really like that. We'll try to we'll try to push that forward.


Yeah, it's funny, as you mentioned these different use cases, I mean, there was just an announcement about I think OpenAI is now doing watermarking. As far as I know, not using ZK, at least nothing in their public announcements mention it. But we did an episode on ZK for watermarking as well.


Like there's these really interesting interaction spaces for ZK in the world, but also ZK with LLM, ZK. I'm really excited that you just presented this one. For me, that's kind of a new one, the guardrails.


I didn't actually have that in my mind before. So yeah, thanks for sharing that with us.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:03:21 - 1:04:18)
Yeah, I think it's super not like it's pretty novel. So even with the people we talked to who are like doing this profession, we're like, this is like fucking really cool. Like how did you come up with that?


And I think another thing is like just the pressure of having Jolt Atlas like out. What's a good way to say it? It's like everyone's doing scalability and we're always focused on this like local proving type stuff.


And then we happen to find like this ARC paper and we're like, oh, we should make that ZK. But there was definitely a flash of genius involved with that. It wasn't like most people were able to just like find it randomly.


But I think anything like that, like if you're just a person who's into ZK who might be in the community, finding these type of use cases like, hey, could this benefit from having sysync verification? Could this benefit for privacy? And that's kind of where you connect the dots.


Most domain experts in ZK don't know about AI or they don't know about these other things and vice versa. So you can actually have this mixing and matching of skills as well. So if you're someone who's looking to make a company, you can find a founder that might be a lawyer or something else and have this mixing and matching that gets these kind of novel ideas brewing.


[Anna Rose] (1:04:18 - 1:04:47)
Going back to your origin story, at least from our context in the ZK Hack Discord, what you're making me think of is like maybe future ZK Hack hackathons should really be ZK Hack X other technology, other industry, because maybe that's where we're at at this point. It's not purely like ZK experiment using ZK libraries. It would be something like bringing what we've learned to something that is a very developed space in its own right.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:04:47 - 1:05:26)
I invite Tarun when you do an AI one because the triangle is like upside down, like AI has all the money. And then there's like cryptography somewhere at the bottom of the pyramid, like the upside down pyramid. And quantum is somewhere down at the bottom too.


But it's like if you flip it around, then you have a bunch of investors show up and people are building things to meet the investors and everyone has a fun time that way as well. And one thing he mentioned to me as well, Tarun's like, I went to this event. I don't remember which one.


There's no other investor besides me. Or you're a technical investor, like you're into the cryptography. That's probably why you're here.


But I think just more generally speaking, like if you do that type of event, it benefits a lot of people because you do have this crossing over of different fields. Montreal part two.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:26 - 1:05:53)
Totally. Yeah. Your amazing t-shirt.


So the Novenet t-shirt, we actually checked, I checked this before starting the interview, but that's like a legendary image for me. It was Gaylord's sort of hockey theme sticker with the Novenet wording. It's very like Montreal Canadiens colours as far as I remember.


And that was our kind of a t-shirt that was given out at CK Hack Montreal.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:05:54 - 1:06:00)
Yeah, definitely. The prompt for that was from Gaylord and then we went out and printed it and brought to the event. I still see some today.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:00 - 1:06:00)
Yeah.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:06:00 - 1:06:02)
It's definitely vintage and awesome.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:02 - 1:06:11)
Nice. Why, is there any other projects you're working on today? Because it sounds like, I mean, ICM Labs is like building all of these things and you've spun out a few things.


Yeah. Is what's next?


[Wyatt Benno] (1:06:12 - 1:06:37)
So we're in the distribution phase. We have this technology that we've been working on the papers that we're writing one more other big paper, but very much about getting this out into the world by a real distribution. And one reason for that is like, we do believe it's the best way to have these guardrails.


We already spoke about a lot of the fine details there. But making agent-to-commerce secure, there's not going to be agent-to-commerce unless it's secure and we feel the distribution is the main job there to do right now.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:37 - 1:06:56)
Cool. Thank you, Wyatt, for coming on the show, sharing with us your kind of journey into ZK. All of the work that ICM Labs is doing.


I really like this pitch that you just shared at the end, this pitch to sort of find that intersection for your ZK project. And yeah, hopefully we get to see more projects like that emerge.


[Wyatt Benno] (1:06:56 - 1:06:57)
Thank you. It's been awesome.


[Nico Mohnblatt] (1:06:57 - 1:07:06)
Yeah. Thank you both for a super fun interview. It's nice to be able to dig into as well the technicals of Jolt Atlas.


It's fun. I think a lot more people should go and look at it now.


[Anna Rose] (1:07:07 - 1:07:17)
Cool. Thanks again, Wyatt, Nico. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Henrik, Rachel, Tanya, and Hector, and to our listeners.


Thanks for listening.