[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 1:57)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online. This week, I speak with Sergey Gorbunov, distinguished engineer at Circle, who joins us this week to talk about Arc, Circle's new L1 blockchain, and specifically its approach to on-chain privacy.


We start with a catch-up about what happened with his previous project, Axelar, and how Circle's acquisition of Interop Labs, the team behind Axelar, brought Sergey to Circle. From there, we dig into Arc itself. It's an EVM-compatible L1 designed for institutional finance with USDC as a gas token.


Arc also has a privacy layer Sergey calls the privacy sector, a private execution environment running alongside the public chain. The core design choice is Trusted Execution Environments, or TEEs, rather than ZK or FHE. And Sergey makes this case that TEEs provide privacy but also allow for composability with existing developer tooling, debugging, and enterprise infrastructure in a way that pure cryptographic approaches currently don't.


That is a bit of a spicy take for this audience. We explore the trade-offs, including the hardware trust assumptions, side-channel risks, and his response to Ian Meyer's public critique of the Arc architecture built around TEEs. So hope you enjoy.


Now, here's my conversation with Sergey Gorbunov. Today I'm here with Sergey Gorbunov, Distinguished Engineer at Circle, working on Arc. Welcome back to the show, Sergey.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:58 - 1:59)
Hey, Anna. Great to be here.


[Anna Rose] (1:59 - 3:01)
So today we're going to be digging into the topic of TEEs and your work over at Circle on the project Arc. I'm very excited to do that. There's been some great debate online about this, and it seems like a really good time to dig into this.


But I first want to do a bit of a catch-up because the last time you were on the show was 2022, April. This was during a time that I was doing a series on bridges, kind of, I think I interviewed four or five teams that were doing different bridges. This was also a time that Axelar, to me at least, was firmly in this cosmos landscape.


It was very much in the cosmos ecosystem. And this was right before Terra. So I want to kind of go back in time to 2022 and hear from you kind of what happened.


What was your experience like? What happened with Axelar since we saw you? And then obviously, I want to understand how you got involved with Circle.


But yeah, let's go back in time. What happened after we spoke?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (3:01 - 3:58)
Yeah. So at Axelar, we essentially had the thesis that, you know, we're going to be in a multi-chain future and we wanted to connect all the blockchains together in a seamless way. Right.


And I think when we spoke in 2022, we were at the very early innings of launching the network. Right. So I think we actually launched with Terra as one of the kind of go-to-market partners and, you know, seeing all the crazy ups and downs for it.


And yeah, we launched with the cosmos ecosystem. We were the main kind of a bridge provider for a lot of the partners there, Osmosis included, and brought a lot of liquidity, especially after the Terra collapsed. I think we, you know, we were able to quickly get like USDC and other assets into the Cosmos ecosystem.


And yeah, since then, the network's been growing, you know, it expanded over the years to support like 80 plus different blockchains and kind of interconnect them together, various protocols around the stack.


[Anna Rose] (3:58 - 4:15)
Cosmos back then was a very big ecosystem. And actually, I think just the year before that, they had been rolling out IBC. I just want to clarify, like Axelar was not doing the bridging between the different chains in the Cosmos ecosystem, right?


This was the bridge out and in.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (4:15 - 4:52)
It was agnostic to any blockchain, right? So we did support IBC and we had connected directly a lot of Cosmos chains through IBC. But yes, the main benefit was that it was able to talk to all the other blockchains outside of Cosmos, which IBC was not and still not.


Right. So it's Ethereum, it's, you know, Avalanche at the time, you know, and many others since then. So, yeah.


But Cosmos, as you said, it was the thing at the time, right? It was growing rapidly and a lot of ups and downs throughout, you know, throughout the cycles. But it was definitely a very vibrant ecosystem.


[Anna Rose] (4:52 - 5:12)
You were a partner of Terra. We actually, for some reason this year, have touched on the Terra story a couple of times. A little bit of history for anyone who wasn't familiar.


But what happened for you as a bridge provider when that went down? Because did you have a lot bridged between Terra directly to Ethereum or were you always going through Osmosis?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (5:13 - 5:24)
So I don't remember all the paths. I remember we had a lot on Avalanche and, you know, of the USDC. I don't remember which other ecosystems had more.


I think Fantom or something like that.


[Anna Rose] (5:24 - 5:26)
Or UST, you mean? Like the...


[Sergey Gorbunov] (5:26 - 5:46)
Well, UST was the asset, right, of Terra. And then we were bridging it out of Cosmos to other ecosystems. Right.


So to Avalanche, to Ethereum, to Fantom, Network and a few others. I don't remember what they were at the time. So I don't remember the exact numbers, but, you know, in tens of millions for sure.


[Anna Rose] (5:47 - 5:53)
And what do you remember finding out about that? Like, do you remember the day for you that must have been like a big one?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (5:54 - 6:58)
I remember with Terra, it was like a couple of things. A, I remember launching with them because on the first day, I think we processed like over a hundred million of the USDC volume and like our systems were going down and everything. That was our first launch day.


And I was like, it was actually a good launch day. We have traffic, we have users and it was pretty fun. And then during the collapse, it was, yeah, 24-7 for a while.


I think the biggest thing was, A, isolating the risk. And so, you know, making sure that Terra itself, people were afraid that Terra itself would be compromised and people would infinitely mint, you know, these coins and then be able to dilute and steal from the pools and so on and so forth. Right.


So we, you know, through the governance sort of suspended the connection to Terra, I think at the time. So that was one thing that happened. And two, then at Cosmos, there was a crisis of where is the liquidity going to come from?


Right. Because that was the main stablecoin in the Cosmos ecosystem and nothing else was available. And we were on our path to roll out, you know, USDC, I think, USDT or whatever other stablecoins.


[Anna Rose] (6:58 - 6:58)
On Osmosis.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (6:58 - 7:19)
On Osmosis. Yeah. And I think we pushed that and flipped that on within like 24 hours, brought a lot of liquidity.


And that was thanks to the protocol, like that was the design that we could do those things quickly. So it was more about onboarding the asset itself and getting it live. But yeah, I mean, I think we definitely brought a lot of liquidity, probably saved a bunch of, you know, assets in the parallel.


[Anna Rose] (7:20 - 7:53)
Crazy. Yeah. We had Dave on earlier this year and he was telling us actually about his side of it on the Osmosis front and the fact that they had been judging these different bridge projects and trying to pick the best one.


And they were kind of doing a very slow process to vet all of these bridges. And then it turned out this stablecoin that was sort of propping up a lot of what they were doing got pulled out under them before they were able to make that decision or like make the new setup happen. Yeah, it's sort of bad timing.


I think you said it was like a two week window that was missed.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (7:54 - 8:13)
It was probably like a week of full time thinking through that. And then frankly, after that, the next few months been rollercoaster as well, right? With the bank collapses, with FTX collapses.


And like usually that means liquidity moving in and out from this DEX, from this chain to that chain. It was pretty, pretty busy times.


[Anna Rose] (8:14 - 8:29)
OK, let's fast forward to your connection to Circle and how that happened. Like, I actually am not entirely clear. Like, was Axeller bought or did you move over?


What was the sort of transition to working at Circle?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (8:29 - 9:27)
Yeah, so Axeller itself, as we launched there, is a public network, right? So it has a decentralised file dataset, public governance. Anybody can join and kind of participate.


And we had a lot of participants in the ecosystem that were building connections and extending the network. And then Circle wanted to launch their own chain, Arc, right? It's a new layer one blockchain that they've been working on.


And they wanted to make sure it's as interconnected with other blockchains as possible and, you know, have the best interoperability stack, kind of serve that. And so they acquired Interop Labs, which was the development team behind Axeller. The Axeller network itself continues to exist and continues to be the public network and the public good.


And a new team from Common Prefix kind of took over the stewardship of the public network. And so they continue developing and building it. And kind of Interop Labs team, the original team behind Axeller, joined Circle to work on the Arc and interoperability stack around it.


[Anna Rose] (9:28 - 9:44)
Got it. Is Arc then a little bit the equivalent of like Tempo over on the Stripe side? Would you put them in sort of a competitive category, a new L1, I guess, focused on stablecoins and payments, but like working more in traditional rails?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (9:45 - 10:35)
Yeah, I would say that the current wave of L1s, as you said, I think they're focused on A, proven use cases, right, kind of a stablecoin payments and everything else around that trading. But B, we are finally, I hope, at the point where some of the institutional adoption and some of the broader adoption of the system kind of goes outside of the Web3 native community. And definitely, you know, Arc and some of the other folks that you see are tailoring towards that, right, and kind of making sure that the new types of requirements are met, right, requirements around, you know, whatever has to happen with respect to the blockchain when it interacts with financial institutions, you know, with real financial assets that have to have, you know, insurances, controls, liabilities behind them. And, you know, Arc is kind of optimised for that.


[Anna Rose] (10:36 - 10:57)
Can you share a little bit about what Circle is today as well? I don't think I've ever had anyone on from Circle. So, like, I think we are all somewhat familiar with USDC.


What is the Circle company? You're saying you're building an L1. Are you within the company?


Are you your own kind of sub-entity? Just curious, like, yeah. Tell me a bit about Circle and the ecosystem.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (10:58 - 11:58)
So to a point, I think Circle is known as was the the issue of USDC, which is, you know, one of the dominant stablecoins that everybody uses. Since then, they've broadened their mission and horizon, right? So now Circle really tries to build kind of the platform, the operating system platform for financial use cases and financial primitives, right?


So that includes everything from having primitives that allow you to launch new assets to infrastructure layer itself, right? Like Arc, there is a deep interoperability stack that's now built around a CCTP, which is a cross-chain protocol for the USDC itself. You know, there is now kind of an agent stack that's been built and a lot of other things.


So, yeah, since the USDC launch, kind of Circle has really broadened and now it owns both the infrastructure pieces in the Web3 as well as this global distribution through USDC and some of the some of the partners. So it makes it, you know, really attractive platform overall.


[Anna Rose] (11:59 - 12:18)
Does it want like Arc, this L1? Are you wanting things like Aave or Compound or like Morpho or these like DeFi products to deploy there? Or do you want brand new projects to emerge from there?


Like, I'm kind of curious what kind of applications you're picturing existing on this.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (12:19 - 13:26)
I mean, a little bit of everything, right? Like we're definitely kind of in the crypto space with no use cases that have a product market fit, right? You know, borrowing lending applications, trading applications, asset issuance applications, stable coin applications, payment applications.


Right. Well understood use case with product market fits. Of course, the best players in those categories are going to come to Arc and, you know, we'll build there and have liquidity and support and everything else.


But really kind of give it a platform that allows this new wave of both agentic applications, I would say, and financial applications from the institutions to come in and thrive is what I think, you know, we're kind of optimising for. On the agentic side. Right.


And, you know, I think you've probably seen everybody is rewriting the applications in these agentic frameworks. Everybody understands they're not going to be, you know, taking credit cards and wire transfers. So you need kind of a fast, efficient blockchain rails to support that.


And, you know, that's that's definitely going to be one of the focusses behind the Circle Stack and, you know, Arc as well.


[Anna Rose] (13:26 - 13:46)
Hmm. This is maybe more of a question to like the Circle ecosystem strategists. I don't know if that's exactly what you're working on, but do you think Circle would take on things like perpdexes and hyper liquid?


Or do you think because of this regulatory, this sort of more connection to more traditional things that it would stay away from that?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (13:46 - 13:48)
By take on, you mean like compete or?


[Anna Rose] (13:48 - 13:54)
Compete, like almost like participate, start to get into the perpdex space, like having maybe their own applications doing that.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (13:54 - 14:37)
Yeah. So I don't think I can like speculate on those things. So but like I said, I think, yeah, if the if there is a product market fit and, you know, a good regulatory compliant path to doing certain things, I think, you know, definitely kind of a, you know, maybe potentially good things to look at.


On that end, I think Circle prides itself to be the compliant body in the U.S. for, you know, asset issuance and for working with digital assets on this intersection between, you know, crypto and traditional finance. Right. So if you come to Circle, not only that, you know, that you'll get a stable coin, but you know that you get, you know, all the checks and balances.


[Anna Rose] (14:38 - 14:38)
Yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (14:38 - 15:09)
Correct. Yeah. Checks and balances and process and anything Circle does, you know, definitely needs to make sure it satisfies, you know, those those checks and balances.


It's a publicly traded company. So there's, you know, a lot of reputation and trust we've built over the years that I think will carry into Arc and, you know, future initiatives and kind of specific shapes that they end up, you know, taking place. I don't know, but it's definitely one of the strengths that you don't see anywhere else for other projects in the space.


Right. So, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (15:09 - 15:11)
How far along is Arc? Is it live?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (15:12 - 15:35)
Yeah. So a lot of the stack has already been built. There is a public test network that anybody can go and, you know, use and interact and launch assets and you'll see a lot of other applications being built there.


And yeah, it's, you know, it's going through its transition to the public mainnet. And, you know, I don't think I can say the date yet, but, you know, hopefully over the coming weeks or months, you'll see those announcements.


[Anna Rose] (15:35 - 15:54)
Got it. I now want to understand what kind of network this is, because we're here actually to talk about the Arc privacy sector. So I want to kind of understand what Arc is.


It's an L1, it's proof of stake. There's a privacy component to the consensus itself. So, yeah.


Why don't we talk a little bit about what the plan is there?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (15:54 - 17:06)
Yeah. So Arc itself is L1. It's EVM compatible.


So, you know, any solidity code that you have, you can run on top of it. It, you know, supports your standard applications from, you know, Solidity, Ethereum, Lend. Underneath the hood, it has fast consensus, you know, all of those nice, nice things.


So it can process lots of transactions. But one of the unique things we're doing is going back to the regulatory question and compliances. Privacy keeps on coming up as a requirement, right, from the institutions, from the people that want to use these technologies.


And so we thought, what is the best architecture for enabling privacy alongside the public space of Arc, what I call? So you can have a very tight composability between public side and private side of Arc and satisfy both kind of public and open use cases where anybody can verify and audit what's happening, as well as the private use cases regarding, you know, asset issues, payments and other applications. And what is really the best design that we think that these kind of two systems can coexist with one another?


And that was the that was the design behind the Arc privacy sector that we recently published.


[Anna Rose] (17:06 - 17:33)
Does this have like a bit of an echo of the shielded part of Zcash? Like, is this kind of a there's like an unshielded environment where except, I guess, programmatic. So you'd have like smart contracts and everything happening, but then you have like the ability to switch over to like kind of move your assets into this private pool that then you can't see into and you can kind of come back out.


Yeah, I'm just kind of curious if it's at all similar to that, if that's how we should think about it.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (17:33 - 18:26)
It's more generalised, right? So Zcash, to your point, it's for specific, you know, transactions, right? And for specific fields, you can do that.


In the Arc, I guess maybe you can think of that idea on steroids, right? So meaning that you have public space that has full EVM composability in the public space. And at the end of the day, public, you know, virtual machine creates, you know, a hash of the execution tree, right?


That included in every block. And you can think of the same thing now happens in the private space. So you have full EVM composability, full smart contracts.


And what that gives you is a commitment of this entire state. And both of these public and private live in the same block space. So that's the benefit that allows you, to your point, go in and out of this, right?


So you can go shield and unshield things and, you know, move between private and public environments.


[Anna Rose] (18:26 - 19:01)
But do you imagine, I mean, I still have the C-cash model, which is like you actually send your tokens into the shielded area. In what you're describing, if you have smart contracts, are some of the contract calls private? And then I'm kind of curious if you're like mixing these programmes into a sort of mixed private public environment or you are sort of on that strict line of like the assets either live in the shielded place and everything happens in the shielded place or they live unshielded and public.


Yeah, I'm just kind of I'm trying to imagine now if you have this smart contract platform, then yeah, what is what happens?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (19:01 - 20:14)
That's a great question. And it's sort of at the crux of challenges of design and something like this. Right.


So meaning that, yeah, like I said, the environments by themselves are fully programmable and Turing complete. Right. So you can have, as you say, a programme that lives half in the public space, half in the private space.


And, you know, throughout its execution, things move in and out. And in fact, because the environments are fully programmable, you could, in principle, do that. Right.


The challenge is, is how do you make sure that the underlying information that should be private continues to be private when you do that? Right. Because every time there is a call from the public space, like a query, like a state transition, right, like those calls could reveal something.


Right. So the way we have done it is that in the design and the architecture, yes, you could do those things. But the way we're rolling them out is sort of step by step, where in step one, we're a little bit more prescriptive in terms of how you make the calls in and out.


And they're around asset transfers being, you know, programmatically potentially, but moved in and out. But as we learn how to build these applications more, the design allows us to have that type of flexibility completely.


[Anna Rose] (20:15 - 20:29)
It's interesting, though, you talked a little bit about the challenge on the public side of, like, recognising what's happened. But in my mind, like, how do you know that what is happening within the private sphere is actually happening correctly? Because that's harder to audit, right?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (20:30 - 21:05)
Yeah. So now it's sort of a question of, in the private land, how do you do things but still get verifiability of the data? Right.


And of course, you know, there are multiple ways to get in verifiability. You can use your knowledge proofs or other cryptographic techniques. The way we're doing it is by relying on trusted execution environments that run on every validator, but still running a consensus across all of them.


So what that means is that whatever you do as a validator, even if you do it in the trusted execution environment, all the other validators have to redo the same and we still reach a consensus on it.


[Anna Rose] (21:05 - 21:08)
So you reach a consensus on the output of the TE?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (21:08 - 21:27)
On the output of TEs. That's right. So TEs produce kind of the state of the private chain.


That's included in the block, but every validator has to redo it. So at the end of the day, we still get kind of integrated by consensus, which is which is very critical. Right.


But we get privacy from the TEs themselves.


[Anna Rose] (21:28 - 21:44)
So in the way you're kind of guaranteeing that whatever's happening in the private sphere is correct, is this consensus part? Because even if one validator was running malicious software, had some weird things it was doing, it would get kind of outvoted by all of the others, I guess.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (21:44 - 21:45)
Correct. Correct.


[Anna Rose] (21:45 - 21:46)
What's your threshold?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (21:47 - 21:49)
It's the standard, you know, yeah, BFT threshold, like two thirds.


[Anna Rose] (21:50 - 22:24)
Two thirds. OK. Would you consider what you're describing as like threshold decryption type validator privacy?


Like we talked about that a long time ago on the show with the osmosis folks. I think the Aptos people are doing something like that. Dan Boneh mentioned it recently.


I don't know if you mentioned on the air or off the air, but he was talking about this kind of, you know, threshold decryption finally becoming like a live used thing. In those cases, they're also kind of like hiding. This is more for the front running, like to prevent front running.


But in what you've built, would you fall under that category?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (22:25 - 22:52)
Not specifically. I think, yeah, the designs that you talk about threshold decryption, they're there explicitly to decrypt something at the end of like block execution. Right.


Like for the MEV protection or other things. In this case, the result is still fully encrypted unless the developer of that contract or application defines a policy that allows certain disclosures to happen around it. Right.


So we don't use, you know, threshold cryptography, at least right now.


[Anna Rose] (22:53 - 22:56)
And then that consensus, is that like consensus on encrypted data?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (22:56 - 22:57)
Correct.


[Anna Rose] (22:57 - 23:07)
And this is kind of what we talked about. So there's some like some calculation happening within the TEE on that data. And then what comes out remains encrypted and then just compared.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (23:07 - 23:08)
Correct.


[Anna Rose] (23:08 - 23:09)
Exactly. It's supposed to match, I guess.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (23:09 - 23:23)
Exactly. Exactly. Yeah.


So just like in regular consensus, the execution has to be deterministic. Right. And it becomes deterministic in the TEE environment as well.


And then you have, you know, encryption that happens on top and you can sort of compare across that.


[Anna Rose] (23:23 - 23:47)
The thing is, though, I want to now understand the link between what we were talking about before with the execution environment, with this consensus environment. And maybe they are the same thing. I'm not sure.


But I always think of that being kind of separated, like that you have the miners or the validators acting in a certain way, but then on top of it or separate from that, you have these private areas. In this case, are they more intertwined?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (23:48 - 25:21)
For simplicity, let's trace execution of a transaction. Right. So in the ARC chain, essentially the transactions propagate through the mempool and transaction could be one of two forms.


It could be a regular, you know, transaction over the public ARC or it could be encrypted transaction. Right. Now, these transactions propagate through the mempools.


And let's suppose a validator gets, you know, a set of transactions. Some of them are encrypted and some of them are clear text. This validator essentially runs two parallel execution environments.


One of them is the EVM over the public state. The other one is the EVM over this private state that happens within the trusted execution environment. When it gets a transaction, it decides which of the VMs needs to execute it, and then it continues processing them one at a time, one at a time until all of the transactions for the block are executed.


And then each, the public VM side and the private VM side produce its state route, which is their commitment to the new state. And then you include that in the block along with all the transactions and you reach consensus on it and you finalise that. And that's how you how you how you reach the next state.


And because you now doing public private execution within these two VMs, like to your question earlier, you can in principle have the transactions that that cross the boundaries. Right. Like I said, you do have to be careful about it to prevent any leakage.


But yes, that execution can happen. So a private side produces something that needs to call the public side. It all happens within the same kind of a machine and node and you can do that efficiently.


[Anna Rose] (25:21 - 25:38)
In the public side, this consensus that's happening, I'm assuming there's a validator set. Is proof of stake or what is it like? What guarantees that on the public side they're acting correctly?


You sort of said on the private side, like the encryptions need to match. But yeah, what happens on the public side?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (25:38 - 25:57)
Yeah. So on the public side, there is a validator set that's been, you know, that runs the consensus, kind of the specifics of the how the validators are chosen. You know, there are different mechanisms that will be available.


But yes, it's a large validator set and they run the standard kind of optimised BFT versions to reach like two thirds majority.


[Anna Rose] (25:57 - 26:10)
OK. Are the validators going to be mostly partners? Like, I feel like I've we've heard a bit more of that model where you have trusted partners running validators instead of just like random person running it from their basement.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (26:11 - 26:34)
Yeah. So the validators themselves are going to be kind of a vetted partners. And that's one of the benefits of Arc is making sure the validators are large, you know, established, reputable entities.


But yeah, so trusted validators, many big institutional partners in a traditional finance space are going to be running validators and participate in the network.


[Anna Rose] (26:34 - 26:52)
OK, so I think I have a bit of a vision for Arc. I think the one thing that's missing for me is like, where does USDC fit in? Like, where's the stablecoin?


Is the stablecoin at the heart of this network? Is it just an asset on the network? Like, where does it live?


Is it an app on the network?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (26:53 - 27:36)
Yeah, so it's a great question. One of the benefits of Arc is going to be is the tight kind of coupling and integration with USDC itself. And so what that means is that, you know, one of the gas options is going to be paying through USDC, right?


So as you interact on the chain, it's a stable asset. And for a lot of the financial institutions, it's a frankly, it's a preferred way to interact with these blockchains. Right.


So it's an asset that they can understand. It's an asset they, you know, they know how to price. There is no volatility behind it.


You know, they can predict whatever revenues, expenses and all of that. And so, yeah, it's going to be tightly integrated within the ecosystem for gas, you know, and potentially like other types of mechanisms.


[Anna Rose] (27:37 - 28:02)
But if with gas, wouldn't it still potentially be variable? Because like, I guess the issue before with ETH was that the ETH, like the gas price was variable, but also the ETH price was variable. So you had these two variables.


Sometimes you'd be spending like hundreds of dollars worth of ETH at the time, which could also be worth less later or more later. But with USDC, it could still like, wouldn't the gas still be variable? Yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (28:03 - 28:50)
So the gas is still definitely variable and you have to do that for kind of denial of service and other protections. But as you see, like with, you know, a lot of the other blockchains as well, if they're fast and if they can process thousands of transactions per second, the variability in the gas cost itself is not that high. Right.


So most transactions you can still do, you know, at, you know, it's very low cost at pennies and it's our variability from the asset fluctuation itself. It doesn't actually add to the price, maybe, or that makes it more complicated, especially if you can process lots of transactions. But it's accounting, it's compliance, it's everything else that has to go around it that, you know, that I think makes it potentially more challenged for some partners, for some, you know, it's not an issue, but for others, it could be more accounting.


Cool.


[Anna Rose] (28:50 - 29:41)
How did the assets move between those public and private spaces if it's just a TEE? Like this is something where, because I think of it as like a public network. So I'm like, isn't the state, like is the state held in like on individual devices?


Like, or is it living in a central place, the validator, like only the validators have state of what's happening on the private front. Like, how does, how does something move into a TEE? The reason I'm going to just give a little context to why I'm asking is that I've always understood it as like, there's a proof that has to be created along with that transaction so that it's very clear what's happening in a TEE.


It's, there's no need for it. There's no proof. But I still don't really understand how that movement happens because it's device based almost, right?


Like it's, TEE is a trusted execution environment on hardware. So where does that hardware live?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (29:42 - 31:17)
Yeah. So a couple of points. So first of all, you can think of TEEs as something that also produces proofs, right?


And in fact, you do have to check those proofs. So TEEs by themselves produce attestations. Okay.


Right. If you wanted to, attestation is your proof. You could just verify that attestation and verify its execution.


We go one step above, like I said, we don't just trust the attestation, but we actually rerun the execution across all the validators. So we don't trust TEEs for the integrity of these attestations, right? So we take one step above and take extra measurements there.


But to your point, the encrypted state itself, it could live anywhere, right? On any node, on anybody that participated in the network. But the ability to either perform state transitions or execute queries with respect to the private state, they now have to be done against the nodes that's been sort of authorised by the consensus or more broadly to have, you know, the access to the private state and decrypt it and answer those types of questions.


So, so there, there's going to be probably a few different types of nodes that would have that. So A, are the validators, of course. So the validators do the state transitions, but B for, you know, wallets, for other types of, you know, explorers or other applications, you still might need an ability to query and typically you have RPC nodes that, that provide that functionality.


And so in this case, there will be special RPC nodes that are provisioned with also trusted execution environments that would have an ability to answer those types of queries.


[Anna Rose] (31:18 - 31:21)
Okay. And how would you pick that? How are those chosen?


Yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (31:21 - 31:56)
So that will be vetted, right? Like by, by the kind of ecosystem and by, by Circle, you know, in principle, right? By the design, if you trust in TEs, it could be anybody.


So design allows, if you assume in the trust of TEs, the design allow anybody to run that because you'll be able to verify the code that they run inside of TEs. So that's actually very, very powerful. Again, Circle is probably going to go a step above that and still vet them and make sure they run in good infrastructure and so on and so forth.


But by the design, you know, that could actually be run on an untrusted node if you want.


[Anna Rose] (31:56 - 32:01)
But this is, this is all, there's a caveat in there, which is like, if you trust TEs completely.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (32:02 - 32:42)
That's right. Just like with any system, any cryptographic assumption, your trust has to start somewhere, right? Whether or not it's math implementation, you know, or it's instantiations, I guess for us, it is the TE as the underlying kind of a root cause.


But the design is not specific to one TE, so you could swap them, you could replace them, you could have multiple TE environments. So it's, it treats TE as a building block. And, you know, I've done like a lot of academic work on it, like actually a decade ago with, you know, Dan Bonet and a few other folks where we formalise TEs, we try to understand how do you use it as a building block within broader, you know, cryptographic environments.


And I think we now have a good understanding of how to do that.


[Anna Rose] (32:43 - 32:45)
Had you actually explored TEs for Axelar?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (32:45 - 33:08)
No, because we, like, we were not focused on privacy, right? And, you know, we did have kind of a multi-party setup across the validators where many parties have to sign things. And the early days we actually used like threshold cryptography for that until we switched to more of a multi-site cryptography.


But yeah, TEs we have not, we have not, you know, explored it because we didn't have privacy needs at the time.


[Anna Rose] (33:08 - 33:43)
So in the announcement you made on Twitter, you kind of described the ARC privacy sector as the last privacy layer in Web3, which is very bold. You then went on to describe the TE infrastructure. And obviously from like our side of the community, you got a little bit of blowback on just the use of TEs.


I'm sure you're well-versed in the security, you know, of TEs, the risks. So let's talk a little bit about that. What made you make that choice?


And I want to bring up some of the counterpoints that were brought up by the community and see what you have to say.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (33:43 - 34:03)
Yeah, for sure. Maybe take it a step back. I mean, I love cryptography, right?


I'm a cryptographer. So I spent grad school, professorship, I wrote many papers on it and, you know, done a lot of lattice work and other things. So trust me, if there is an opportunity to use cryptography, I will do that.


[Anna Rose] (34:03 - 34:08)
Okay. Okay. So you also had to have your arm bent is what you're saying.


All right.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (34:08 - 36:01)
No, I think I, you know, I've been, I guess, the last decade spent more actually trying to build products and actually try to integrate security designs and good privacy and principles into systems. And I just know the complexity and the challenges that go around them. And, you know, for Arc and everything we've been doing, it had to be a practical solution.


And at that point, you know, as we were thinking about it, I just had to put a product hat first, not a technologist hat first, right? I think as a technologist and frankly, first company, you know, when we were starting out of grad school, like Dan Bonet was advising me, we try to commercialise a lot of MPC, a lot of homomorphic encryption stuff. We also ended up using actually some TE, you know, stuff, but that was a sort of a decade ago.


So I, the complexities are there and, you know, I well understand what that means for the complexities once you integrate them in the system. So it's, it's, it's relatively easy to write, you know, papers about them, but it's really, really hard to build a product that people use. And I think the TE right now, when it comes to general execution environments, when it comes to ease of usability, and when it comes to actually understanding a little bit more security and assumptions behind these TEs, I think that mix is pretty much there and providing a really strong environment that composes with developer stacks, that's, that's, that's actually one of the points I want to hammer out. Most privacy environments, they're not used because they do not compose.


They do not compose for debugging. They do not compose for developers. They do not compose for the users.


And you have to always rebuild the whole ecosystem of those tools in parallel. Right. And so we wanted something that composes a lot better, it's a lot more tightly integrated, but still provides, you know, really strong security and privacy properties and, you know, relying on TEs as the underlying assumptions is the way to go these days.


[Anna Rose] (36:01 - 36:09)
Do you mean, when you say composed, do you mean like just being EVM compatible on either side or, yeah, is there a different kind of composition you're imagining here?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (36:09 - 37:50)
There's a lot more, right? So when you're running a system in production, what are the types of things that you have to deal with? So number one, debugging.


So a user comes in and says, Hey, my transaction failed. You, whatever as a support person, application developer, whatever that means, you have to understand where the issues are, is the issue in the smart contract itself, is the issue in how the transaction was sent from the front end and maybe encoded, is the issue in the underlying execution environment, those types of things typically require a collection of tools to be built, right? So if you're running a system, you have, you know, your data logging system, so data dog or something else where all the data gets dumped and you get to analyse it and you, then you have, you know, your analytic systems, dashboard, performance monitors, and so on and so forth.


Then you have your support staff, right? That deals with all those types of issues. And then later you have accountant and everybody else that also has to have, you know, understanding of what happens and maybe they have to generate a report and to your point about gas, like that's an accountant statement that has to be generated and somebody needs to, needs to at least make sure, you know, revenues and expenses match or whatever they need to be.


So there's typically 20 other tools that have to run in parallel with your main blockchain system for the ecosystem to thrive and for the developers and users to make their stuff. And so that's what I mean by actually composability, it's sort of composability with outside systems, composability within smart contracts you can get, and, you know, we kind of know how to do that. That's, that's okay.


You can, you can do something there, but this developer and broader corporate integration suite is incredibly complex for pure cryptographic solutions, which we try to avoid.


[Anna Rose] (37:51 - 38:37)
So you feel that, was it sort of like the decision to, to use TEEs at this level of the stack was also made because of how critical it is and how you, it sounds like even though you've worked in cryptography for a long time, you still have sort of wariness about using it as a basis, like here you've decided you've opted instead for kind of an enclave on hardware, which, I mean, it has all of the problems of, oh, well then you have to trust the hardware, et cetera, but I do feel like we've covered this quite often on the show and I do know the pros and cons here. In your case, it being at the sort of base of the stack, is this why you chose TEEs for that, but would you opt for more exciting cryptography for different parts or would you do TEEs the whole way now?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (38:38 - 40:05)
No, I mean, like if there are opportunities to do, you know, stronger security without compromising a developer experience, right, or these composability properties, well, absolutely, right, like, you know, if it makes sense, for instance, to sometime use threshold cryptography for, you know, some MEV protection, yeah, you can still have that as a layer on top. By the way, one of the nice things about ARC and the way it was designed is that there is this separation of consensus and execution environments, and it's a really nice separation. That's what allowed us to plug in this privacy VM environment, but you could have other type of environments running, you know, maybe for homomorphic encryption or oblivious ROM in parallel where, okay, you actually need extra layers of security and you don't want to rely on, you know, any hardware assumptions and you can do that.


I mean, in fact, some of those could nicely compose with the enclave environments as well, right? So I'm sure, you know, one of the potential criticisms of enclaves is that you have sometimes side channel attacks, right? So they could be software, they could be hardware, but, you know, we've also done work, how do you leverage things like oblivious RAM, right, to protect against side channel attacks from enclaves, at least in the software layer.


So you can imagine those types of building blocks being as like additional, maybe data structures that get plugged in into the environment that runs for TEE and you get a little bit of best of both worlds.


[Anna Rose] (40:06 - 40:55)
Actually, yeah, maybe I should have asked before I made the comment before, is the bottom of the stack, like the part where the TEE is being used, is that the most critical data? Like, yes, it has the private state in it, but I guess maybe we'll say a theoretical here, but like if TEEs were completely broken in two years, would it matter to the kinds of things that you're hiding? Are these things that have to be private forever?


Is it a short-term privacy or a long-term privacy that you're looking for? The reason I ask this is I think this has come up on a recent episode where we talked about, like, sometimes it's OK to take a bit of a risk because you'd have to break it within like 30 seconds of it existing for it to be really damaging. I'm kind of curious if your system fits more into that category where it's like because it's about a validation system where it's happening kind of in real time.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (40:56 - 41:10)
The way we think about it is that ARC and, you know, the private sector itself, it's a platform, right? So we want to provide a platform. But given that it's fully programmable, it means that, you know, it really depends on the use case and what the developer needs.


[Anna Rose] (41:10 - 41:10)
Right.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (41:10 - 42:28)
So there are things like, you know, explicit like view keys that allow a developer to authorise, you know, maybe like financial report or to do their taxes, you know, to specific accountants. Whether or not their information is, you know, needs to be forever protected or not, you know, it's up to their use case. Again, because as a circle, we do have an ability to work with kind of a vetted validators and, you know, RPC providers and so on and so forth.


Like we could also add the network layer control who gets access to some of the, you know, encrypted state as well. And, you know, make sure it's not kind of a propagated. But we we do intend the encrypted state to be protected with the best guarantees in mind.


And for us, actually, the best guarantees being actually post-quantum secure as well. So we've done like another paper that we published, I think, about a month ago where we talk about all the post-quantum strategies that go behind the arc. So from our side, we give a platform.


We do protect it as much as possible, you know, including post-quantum addressers. From the user side, you can always, you know, customise it, have view keys, not worry about the encrypted data, maybe have short term application. But those application specific things that we leave to the users.


But we just want to give the best platform that we can.


[Anna Rose] (42:28 - 42:48)
But you just sort of said so, like the validators are chosen so you can still do things on like how encrypted it is or if they decrypt it, like, is there almost a bit of an admin system somewhere built in there? Like, could you say you needed to find something or you needed to like, are you able to do it?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (42:49 - 43:32)
So A itself, like Arc will have consensus, so it would have certain governance rules and so on and so forth. Right. And I think, you know, as as the network gets rolled out, you know, some of those will be will be published.


But B, as a developer, you it's a fully programmable environment. Right. So you can, in principle, as a developer say, hey, I need to expose this amount of data or I need to show this data to an auditor or I need to show it, make sure it doesn't violate any sanction lists.


Right. And those are the types of asks that we we get all the time. Anybody running the systems need to make sure they're not interacting with, you know, foreign nations that are on the OFAC lists, as an example.


So the system has an ability for the developer to, you know, to satisfy any of those checks that they that they want.


[Anna Rose] (43:33 - 43:50)
But like, if you as Circle needed to say, like, say you're worried about a transaction has gone through it being nefarious, would you be able to I know maybe there'd be like a group, but would you be able to propose to unmask that, like to unshield it if you needed to?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (43:51 - 44:23)
No. So by default, there is a consensus of validators and, you know, everybody has to reach the decision. Now, who could propose this consensus and rules and some disclosure to happen?


You know, that's sort of TBD and that will be kind of rolled out over the time. Right. But by default, for any action, you have to reach a consensus.


Now, who can propose it? I think it's subject to governance rules that will be kind of laid out later. But two thirds majority is kind of at the protocol layer that that's always there.


[Anna Rose] (44:23 - 44:49)
You did talk about like encrypting and then decrypting. I'm kind of curious because, like, I always think of if you have to encrypt and then do something in a system and then decrypt, that sounds like FHE, not really TEs. So, like, are you are you kind of doubling up there?


Are you doing like you're making everything private and then you're acting on it within an enclave and then you're bringing it out still encrypted? Or are you doing an encryption on the in and out? I actually didn't.


Yeah, I just didn't follow that.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (44:50 - 45:41)
Yeah. So, by the way, like, T can be modelled as all of these kind of complicated, you know, functional encryption, functional functionalities, right? Like we wrote like some papers on that a while ago.


So all of these things are very similar. The way that we instantiate it is that the transactions are encrypted by the user using kind of a post-quantum encryption. First, they propagate through the mempool.


They propagate through the validators. Validators bring those inside of T, then inside of T. So once something is inside of T, you can think of it as already being protected or shielded or encrypted, right, by the T environment itself.


So then you can strip off the inner layer of encryption, right, and then do the computation within the T, but anything that leaves T, if you want to protect it, you want to re-encrypt it again at the exit. So that's what happens here as well.


[Anna Rose] (45:41 - 46:00)
So it's happening kind of in the T, there's some encryption happening just as it touches the outside. Inside, is it still then in like a plain, is it sort of like in the T, if you were sitting in it, would it just sort of be happening in public? Like there's no, it's not hidden in any way under the hood.


Inside.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (46:00 - 46:13)
Yeah. So inside of T, the T itself sees the data, but the T itself is a shielded box, right? It is the, you know, depending on T, like that is the encrypted memory space in some sense.


[Anna Rose] (46:13 - 46:19)
I'm just trying to understand like the risk here. It's like, if you could look inside the T, then you would see what's happening.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (46:19 - 46:27)
That's right. Yeah. If you can look inside of T, you can see what's happening.


That's definitely, you know, the assumption that we'll make.


[Anna Rose] (46:27 - 47:31)
Is there any record of what happens in there? And the reason I, I mean, you mentioned post-quantum and I want to, I want to talk about this where, I mean, this is something that I think is sort of, it's all the cypherpunk and like hardcore cryptographers like yourselves have been thinking about this forever. But, you know, laymen like myself have only, it's only just dawned on me recently that like if quantum computers are able to break quote unquote encryption, it doesn't mean that like, like systems could upgrade in the meantime, which is great.


But if the encrypted data is somehow held somewhere from the past and yes, the new systems have new encryption, but the old systems had old encryption, you could with a quantum computer decrypt it and actually look at all of the stuff that was in there. And so I wonder in this case, like all of that stuff in a T, if it was accessed today, even if it's not, if you can't look at it right now, would you be able to see it in the future with a quantum computer? I think your answer is probably going to be no, because it's, you already talked about it being post-quantum secure somehow.


So yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (47:31 - 48:17)
Yeah. So anything that is kind of fingerprint or checkpointed to the blockchain itself always uses kind of a post-quantum secure layer in cryptography, right? So you cannot, you cannot, you know, that's a state that we assume that will be there forever.


And so, yeah, we'll want to make sure that to your point, that kind of a capture now reveal later types of attacks don't work on it. And in this case, there's two types of encryptions. There is, you know, public encryption for the transactions that go in and out.


And then there is typically symmetric encryption for the actual state itself. Symmetric encryption is relatively, you know, straightforward to make post-quantum secure. For the public encryption, you know, these days you want to use like a hybrid of both classical and post-quantum secure encryption.


And then, you know, you end up with a nice layer of encryption there as well.


[Anna Rose] (48:18 - 48:24)
Is this already post-quantum? Are you kind of saying more like, oh, these are the sort of tweaks we would make in order to make it post-quantum?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (48:24 - 50:11)
No, from day one, kind of the privacy sector will have, you know, the encryption being post-quantum secure. There is, I guess, like TEE itself environments would have to be post-quantum secure. And so there is a little bit of work there with the providers of the actual TEEs.


But the state that will go on the blockchain itself from day one, it's going to be post-quantum secure. By the way, on that, like one important thing I want to point out, which is this is something I haven't realised until building on this as well, is actually standard cryptography protected by the layer of TEEs gives you post-quantum protection of your assets from day one. So this is very, very important, right?


So think of it this way. Why are people worried about attacks on the blockchains? Because you have a public key and some assets behind it and everybody can see what the public key is.


And if you have a quantum computer, you break and figure out the corresponding symmetric cryptography. Now, in the privacy space, your public key is always encrypted by symmetric encryption that's always post-quantum secure. So you don't ever actually ever expose the public key.


And so nobody can actually try to come up with a corresponding secret key from it. So almost like in Bitcoin, there is a way of, you know, like pay to hash and like people use this as a temporary way to protect yourself against quantum computers because your public key is not exposed and it's only the hash that's revealed. But in this case, your entire state, including all the public keys and the assets, are encrypted so you don't see them and nobody can break them.


And I think it's actually a very cool property that I haven't realised either until recently that like this layer of TEE gives you post-quantum protection like for regular cryptography from day one.


[Anna Rose] (50:12 - 50:29)
I mean, in this recent episode with Dan, we talked about this hybrid signatures where you just put something that was not post-quantum with something post-quantum and you actually get the post-quantum characteristic. I didn't hear about it for TEEs. This almost suggests like everything should be just run in a TEE because then it's automatically post-quantum.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (50:29 - 50:39)
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, yeah, you do make that sort of assumptions there.


But absolutely. I think it's actually it's a huge benefit that, you know, I haven't I haven't thought of until recently as well.


[Anna Rose] (50:39 - 51:06)
I have two questions coming up. One is what kind of cryptography is in that encryption? Like what is the encryption method itself?


And then what are the tradeoffs? Because I feel like we've talked a lot about how great these TEEs are, but there's got to be something beyond just the fact that there is this like sort of long tail risk that they get unshielded or like that they would be broken. But yeah, I want to talk about first the cryptography and then the tradeoffs.


So what's what is that encryption made of?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (51:06 - 51:36)
So there are different different layers, but the majority of the important data, which is the state, right, that just encrypted using your, you know, a symmetric encryption. Right. So symmetric encryption, as you know, is kind of secure against quantum attacks because, you know, you don't have a corresponding kind of a public key and, you know, you're relying on sort of AES or some variants of it.


And it's a it's a cypher that people believe to be post-quantum secure. And the majority of the state is encrypted with with the variants of AES.


[Anna Rose] (51:37 - 51:45)
OK, AES. Is that a choice, by the way, or is that like automatically built into the TEE? Like does a TEE provider give you this or is this what you've developed?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (51:46 - 52:06)
What we haven't developed, we're using standard libraries, but it's a choice. Right. You know, so within the TEE, to your earlier question, things that come out, they need to be encrypted and you get to decide, you know, how they're encrypted.


If you're sending them back to the user, you can encrypt it under the user key. But if it's most of the state that just gets put back on the blockchain, then, you know, you can just use a kind of a symmetric encryption for that.


[Anna Rose] (52:07 - 52:09)
OK, now what are the tradeoffs of using a TEE?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (52:10 - 52:21)
Yeah. So let's let's first of all, what are the alternatives? Right.


And then we can talk about sort of the tradeoffs. I mean, the alternatives are fully kind of cryptographic solutions, let's say that. Right.


[Anna Rose] (52:21 - 52:24)
And FHE would be the most equivalent, I feel. Right.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (52:24 - 53:48)
FHE, you know, function encryption, multiparty computation. Right. Those are those essentially your your options.


Now, so let's take a look at FHE slash MPC, right, which is, you know, you can go from one to the other. By themselves, let's say FHE is wonderful that you can encrypt anything. You can you can do any type of computation.


The issues are, A, the, you know, the performance overheads. So everything in the FHE has to work over some type of encryption. Let's say like Latte is based on cryptography.


That means that every bit that you want to compute on gets encoded in a large array of numbers. Think of it that way. And then those numbers have to be manipulated, you know, in large arrays to do the computation.


So as opposed to doing computation over the bits, you're now doing them over large arrays that are kind of encoding those bits. So the performance overheads are there. They're pretty significant still.


And if you want really general computation, they're, you know, extraordinary. Right. For specific computations, you can optimise things.


If you only care about, you know, a payment from A to B, you can do that relatively efficiently. But for more generic computations, they're just intractable. And in fact, I think most people don't realise that FHE has a fundamental problem that everything has to be computed in the worst case runtime on the worst possible input.


[Anna Rose] (53:49 - 53:51)
This encrypted input.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (53:51 - 54:17)
Yeah. You're not allowed to see has this input terminated or not. Right.


Because if the input terminated, like you're actually revealing information. So, for instance, I'm sending you a transaction. If you're able to see like reverts of the transaction along the way, you actually learn information about the transaction.


And like for most smart contracts, you're going to expose everything that's inside there. So you always have to run in the worst case runtime on any possible input.


[Anna Rose] (54:17 - 54:17)
Oh, dear.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (54:18 - 54:24)
So that theoretical overhead, I think something very few people realise and it makes it very impractical for generic computations.


[Anna Rose] (54:25 - 54:25)
Right.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (54:25 - 54:29)
For generic computations. So that's the biggest one, you know, kind of a drawback.


[Anna Rose] (54:29 - 54:31)
What was the other kind of cryptography you mentioned?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (54:32 - 56:09)
I mean, there is a functional encryption, which is, you know, so functional encryption technically can allow you to release certain intermediate results and, you know, still be secure against that. But the computation overhead for that is on the next level of overheads. And, you know, that's that that's even harder to do.


And so I spent my grad school like doing functional encryption. So it's it's complicated. But yeah, you know, the good thing about FHE, let's say approaches, right, or MPC is that, yeah, you can technically start with one simple cryptographic assumption.


Implementations are not easy. You do have to unroll every computation into the format that FHE understands that usually being some type of a circuit. And then you do have to have that circuit to to perform on the worst case compute runtime.


But the biggest one, which I would say is that, yeah, by default, like you just break all this composability that we talked about earlier. So everything with FHE, it just does not work with your standard system, does not work with your debug and support ticket and systems. So you pretty much have to build that entire enterprise stack to accommodate that.


Whereas with TEs, you can carefully define rules and permissions that would, you know, allow accounting to do their job, you know, on your encrypted state as the developer of the smart contract. And that's pretty straightforward. And, you know, you can clod most of it these days.


But with FHE, those stacks just don't exist. And you have to rebuild them, which I found to be the real barrier, right, for adopting the systems.


[Anna Rose] (56:09 - 56:13)
And I have to ask, since you're on the Zero Knowledge podcast, why not ZK?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (56:13 - 56:28)
Well, yeah. So ZK by itself, right, you have to ask who knows the data, right, and who is going to be computing these computations, right? So in this case, in the world where nobody should be able to see the data, ZK by itself is not sufficient.


[Anna Rose] (56:29 - 56:32)
Doesn't work because someone at the start knows the data and has to make the proof.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (56:32 - 56:33)
Because somebody has to know the data.


[Anna Rose] (56:33 - 56:34)
Yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (56:34 - 57:27)
Correct. So typically people combine ZK with FHE, right? So FHE by itself also is not sufficient from what we discussed, right, because FHE doesn't give you integrity.


So if you tell me you did the computation over FHE and you tell me include this result in my blockchain, I cannot do that by itself, right? I either have to, again, rerun that computation across all the validators or I have to ask you to compute a ZK proof that I will then verify my consensus and include that. And, you know, putting ZK on top of FHE, that's another layer of overheads, which makes it intractable for many use cases.


But by itself, yeah, ZK, you know, it only gives you kind of integrity and privacy with respect to somebody who knows the entire state. So for general smart contracts where it's multi-party interaction across many players and you don't want to see, you know, who owns what, that makes it harder.


[Anna Rose] (57:27 - 57:32)
In the case of TEs though, like would you ever use ZK for integrity there too?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (57:32 - 58:03)
You could, right? Like, like I said, like, you know, you could keep on augmenting TEs with Oblivious, with ZK type of backend agents if you want. Because we rerun consensus anyways and we don't trust TEs for integrity, we don't need that.


But if you don't want to rerun consensus and you want to save on that, you could plug in kind of a ZK within the TE without having the FHE, right? So you're essentially then replacing FHE backend with TE backend and you're still taking kind of a ZK overhead only in this case.


[Anna Rose] (58:03 - 58:17)
So going back to my initial question, though, what are the tradeoffs of TEs? So we've kind of walked through the different types of cryptography, how they could be used. I mean, I think performance you shared, but what is the negative of working with a TE in this context?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (58:17 - 58:55)
I mean, the negative is kind of it's the assumption that you make, right, on the on the secure implementation of TE, right? So if you model TE as a black box and everything is great, then, you know, you're solid. But there are things like certain types of TEs people have found, like, you know, some side channel attacks, right?


So if you were to have access to the machine and the physical environment and you can plug in some electrical probes into the CPU, you know, maybe you can extrapolate something. You know, for us, we're relying on kind of a nitro enclaves from AWS, at least as a starting point to which nobody actually has the physical access. Right.


[Anna Rose] (58:55 - 59:04)
So you have double protection. You actually have them in a place which is hard to get to in the first place. That's right.


And then you have the trusted execution environment.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (59:04 - 59:19)
That's right. Yeah. So it's a you're relying on the kind of the entity to instantiate them and their physical separation and physical controls, which, you know, they're incredibly strict about, of course.


And then the, you know, the implementation of the TE itself.


[Anna Rose] (59:20 - 59:55)
Like, I'm not familiar enough with how TEs work. I mean, as I've understood it, there's a whole tech stack that interacts with that. Is there any risk that that tech stack side of things could be compromised, like with all of these AI hacks happening and just, I mean, not hacks of AI, but like where clearly it's like an inhuman level of scrutiny and they're able to find like insane little loopholes, little little gaps where they can act maliciously.


Like, is the software that runs the TEs or runs within them or interfaces with them, like, is that ever a vulnerability point beyond the physical entity?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (59:56 - 1:00:56)
The answer is yes. But that answer is yes for anything you do with privacy or cryptography. Right.


Like, I'm sure you see, I'm sure you see now, you know, the ZK and Zcash, you know, exploits, and I think in general in crypto, the number of exploits again, like picked up because of all these AI tools. So yeah, like, you know, you have a software implementation, of course, you know, you're going to have some, some exposures. And I think people need to learn how to leverage AI as both they build systems and, you know, defend systems.


And it's not easy to do with, with complicated systems. So the simpler it is, you know, the less likely you have vulnerabilities. I would actually argue that the ZK systems that we have, they're a lot more complex.


And so they probably more issues that people don't know. Because the reality is like Zcash and like, yeah, like Zcash and like that implementation, it's probably like, you know, a couple of dozen people that can understand what happens there. It's a very, very complicated system.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:56 - 1:01:09)
Although more today. I mean, maybe when it first came out, like the orchard bug, I agree. But actually, I think we see a lot of people learning in the ZK hack discords.


There's like more than you, than you know.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:01:10 - 1:01:15)
No, that's okay. A few hundred people, let's say that. Maybe a thousand.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:15 - 1:01:15)
Yeah.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:01:17 - 1:01:23)
A thousand people would know how to do ZK, probably not a thousand people understand like Zcash implementation.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:23 - 1:01:24)
Fair. Yeah, true.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:01:24 - 1:02:22)
So I think still like probably, you know, a couple of dozen, maybe a hundred understands Zcash implementation and like all the details, because that's also deep. Right? Like there's a math layer there of like libraries and everything else.


And there's a cryptography layer on top of the actual ZK. Then there's a systems layer of how it's actually used and everything else along the way. So that stack is pretty deep.


So, you know, the deeper the software stack, the more I think vulnerabilities, of course, you know, you have to, you have to keep an eye on, but actually unrelated to what we're discussing, I think we as security slash privacy, you know, technologists need to think what is maybe actually a more dynamic way to build the systems that can patch faster and mitigate some of these things more dynamically as they, as they know, so almost like making an assumption that there will be an AI that will discover something and that might happen before you do, so what are the built-in mechanisms you have in the system to protect against that?


You have to create the antibodies.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:22 - 1:02:26)
They have to be there ready and they have to be evolving themselves. Right?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:02:27 - 1:02:27)
Exactly. Yes.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:28 - 1:02:42)
And they have to be crawling around it. Like I have a visual now that's like these attackers coming in from the sides, but like all around there's this layer of little white hat hacker bots trying to break it first and then create the antibody as quickly as possible. Huh?


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:02:42 - 1:02:52)
Yep. Yep. Create the antibodies, like system level isolations, right?


Like, you know, contagion mitigations, you know, you know, all of that has to be.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:54 - 1:02:56)
Inflammation, somehow, it actually protects you. Interesting.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:02:57 - 1:03:10)
Yeah. So I think like that's something none of the kind of legacy systems have, and I think we have an opportunity for the new systems going forward, you know, whatever technologies they use is to bake that from the, from the ground up, which I think we must. Interesting.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:11 - 1:03:22)
Cool. Well, Sergey, I don't know if you have anything else you want to share, maybe like how people can get involved or what's, what you're, what you're thinking about today in terms of, yeah, I don't know, next steps.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:03:23 - 1:03:44)
Yeah. I mean, a lot of ARC material is starting to be posted online, so you can see like the post quantum paper we announced a couple of weeks ago, the privacy paper that we posted as well, the, the ARC testnet is, is live and, you know, people can start playing with that and seeing what's available there, you know, and otherwise, yeah, happy, happy to answer any questions if people DM me as well.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:44 - 1:04:08)
Cool. I do want to do a quick shout out to Ian Myers, who responded a lot to your post because I actually felt like the dialogue back and forth between you was interesting just around the concept of TEs from an implementer and a researcher and kind of he's more on the ZK side, I think, and you're more coming from the TE side. Some of the questions and ideas that we talked about today, I feel like we're covered in that thread.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:04:09 - 1:04:52)
Yeah, it was a really important back and forth, I think, you know, for, for questions, but I think kind of taking a step back, right, like I think the reason for back and forth, like put aside again, like technological ideologies, right. You know, if, if one can use the best technology, of course they should. I feel like at the privacy, we're, and the reason I call this sort of the last project, cause I think we're a little bit all tired of hearing about it and not having systems that work and not having it been used, at least I am, you know, I spent, you know, over a decade on, on, on the thinking, building the system from research to production stuff.


Very little of my day to day is actually using any of these systems today.


[Anna Rose] (1:04:53 - 1:04:54)
And you feel like they should be.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:04:54 - 1:05:52)
I think they should be. I think again, like because of AI threats, because of everything else, like we do need to be encrypting more data. We do need to be protecting our confidentiality.


With AI, essentially the data, you know, is your intelligence, right? If you don't protect your data, you know, open AI's and clouds of the world are going to be doing your job better than you tomorrow, like period. So having a data privacy, I think is just incredibly important.


Having confidentiality is incredibly important. And I just want to see more tools and systems embed that from the day one. And I think we do have that opportunity A with, you know, some of these new blockchain stacks like Arc, B as we build around all these agentic, agentic use cases and AI use cases, I think we have an opportunity to embed that at the core of the systems.


And so I want that to be there with as little friction as possible. You know, I actually hope to see more use of it at the end.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:52 - 1:06:27)
It's funny at the beginning of the year, I think we were like 2026 is the year of privacy, but maybe not in the way that we expected it to be, where it's like, it becomes like the full loss of privacy becomes much more real. As these agents really come online and just the scale of what AI can do becomes more apparent to all of us, like how important these spaces are that remain a place where you can be free to, you know, do your, do your activities, do your thinking, do your writing without it all feeding into something that knows that much about you.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:06:27 - 1:06:30)
Yeah, absolutely. Maybe that's the big motivator.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:30 - 1:06:49)
That's kind of an unfortunate one, but yeah, cool. Well, Sergey, thank you so much for sharing with us your story of Axelar since we last spoke, your move to Circle, the building of Arc, some of the choices that you've made and yeah, our conversation about TEs. Thank you so much.


[Sergey Gorbunov] (1:06:49 - 1:06:51)
Awesome. Thanks so much for having me and for the discussion.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:52 - 1:06:58)
Cool. I want to say thank you to the team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Hector and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.