Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Tarun and I chat with Kostas Kryptos from Mysten Labs and Sui. We chat about the latest work they've been doing bringing ZK to Sui, with an update about zkLogin, and Kostas introduces zkAt or ZK Authenticator, a new research project that describes how to offer programmable and updatable access control to accounts by using the properties of Groth16 in a new way.


We also discuss the ways they are thinking about making Sui quantum ready, their work with the Greek stock market to try to bring it onchain, and more.


Now, before we kick off, I just wanted to point you towards the ZK Jobs Board. There you can find job postings from top teams working in ZK. If you're a team looking to hire, you can also post your jobs there today. We've heard great things from teams who found their perfect hire over on the ZK Jobs Board, and we hope it can help you as well. Find out more at jobsboard.zeroknowledge.fm. You can find this on our website, and I've added it to the show notes.


Now, here is our episode with Kostas.


Today, Tarun and I are here with Kostas Kryptos from Mysten Labs and the Sui project.


Welcome, Kostas.


Kostas Kryptos [01:37] Very good to see you. Both of you. It's been a while. I'm super happy I'm coming back to my roots of zero knowledge and advanced crypto. Thank you so much for this.


Anna Rose [01:46] Nice.


Hey, Tarun.


Tarun Chitra [01:48] Hey. Excited to be back. It's been a while.


Anna Rose [01:50] Yeah. True.


So, Kostas, you've been on the show before. Previously, you were talking about proof of solvency for exchanges. And then last time you came on, you introduced zkLogin.


Kostas Kryptos [02:01] I did.


Anna Rose [02:02] zkLogin is similar to ZK Email, which our audience might be familiar with as well. And in that episode, we had you and Aayush on together.


Kostas Kryptos [02:10] Exactly.


Anna Rose [02:11] Yeah. Today, I mean, I want to talk about all the ways in which ZK is now being used in the Sui and Walrus ecosystems. But yeah, maybe I also want to share quickly my connection to the network. So ZKV, my validator business, is actually running a validator on Sui and on Walrus, which has kept me kind of in the loop.


Tarun, what's your connection to the network?


Tarun Chitra [02:34] I was a seed investor, small seed investor, but kind of have known Evan for a long time --


Anna Rose [02:40] Same.


Tarun Chitra [02:42] And I have spent a bunch of time talking to different Sui DeFi protocols and investing in Sui DeFi protocols. So I've been more on the not ZK side of Sui, let's put it that way. But obviously, excited about the fact that there's a lot more first-party support of ZK in Sui than a lot of other ecosystems, and trying to figure out where that will go.


Anna Rose [03:07] Cool.


Kostas Kryptos [03:07] Thank you, Tarun.


Anna Rose [03:09] So, Kostas, you have been on the show before and I think we've done intros, like extensive intros. But why don't you just tell the audience kind of who you are briefly and what you're working on at Mysten Labs?


Kostas Kryptos [03:20] Sure. Sure. Very quickly. So, by the way, I started my career as AI engineer and researcher. I was hacked.


Anna Rose [03:27] This is useful.


Kostas Kryptos [03:29] I was hacked on 2003, 2004. I had a prediction market back then. I used neural networks to predict soccer outcomes. Imagine this was my job.


And because of many wealthy people using my engine to do all of these prediction market selections, I was pretty much a target. And then someone hacked me.


And after this, one of the very good professors in mathematics in Greece came to me, Kostas, you have to improve your security posture in the ecosystem. And then, this is where I turned into cryptography.


I did a lot of stuff around digital signatures. You will see me actually breaking the EdDSA, breaking zero-knowledge proofs, breaking post-quantum schemes, and all of this stuff.


But what happened and changed my Life, it was 2009 that I joined the pretty much the Satoshi family. I was very close friends with many people who were one of the first designers of Satoshi. And then, I worked very closely with Mike Hearn, who was a creator of BitCoinJ, the Bitcoin library in Java. And this gave me pretty much a ticket to get into the core team very quickly, like of the Bitcoin network.


I worked in many companies since then on the crypto space, but this is where Mark Zuckerberg started the Libra project on Facebook. And then, he hired me to lead the cryptography team.


Eventually, the Libra didn't launch for many reasons, not because of the technology. Technology was there. And you can see it now, so many projects emerged after the Libra collapse. Sui is one of them. We had Aptos, we had some other projects from there.


But the reality is the team at that time, and if you consider how much money Facebook spent into building the cryptography team was immense. It was probably a lot, a lot of many millions, I would say, even billions, working on this particular effort.


Facebook tried to build a stablecoin, which was a basket of tokens back then. So it was not a stable dollar, not a stable euro, but it was pretty much an ETF of tokens. So some euros, some dollars, blah, blah, blah. At the same time, blockchain was not at its best.


Anna Rose [05:32] It's on outs with the government.


Kostas Kryptos [05:35] Yes. Yes. We also had COVID. As you can imagine, eventually, the project didn't work, but the team that we had was, as I told you before, one of the best in the world at that time.


Obviously, Mark hired many folks into Silicon Valley. And working for Facebook, I personally interacted with WhatsApp as well, working on payments for end-to-end encryption in the system. Libra had the plan to also be part of the Messenger and WhatsApp payments.


Eventually, nothing from this happened, but the nice thing is Sui made it.


So five of us left Facebook. I was one of the first who realized, look, Facebook is slow, Facebook couldn't make it because of the regulation, but at the same time, we have a technology here that we cannot ignore.


And I personally worked pretty much in a direction from the leadership of Facebook on solvency proofs. This was one of my first initiatives on the zero-knowledge proof space. But also, we did the first open source library for STARKs, Winterfell. Probably, you know Winterfell.


Anna Rose [06:33] Yes. Yes.


Tarun Chitra [06:33] Oh, yes.


Kostas Kryptos [06:34] Yes. Exactly. I was leading as a director of cryptography of this project. I mean, it was pretty much my baby.


Anna Rose [06:41] With Bobbin.


Kostas Kryptos [06:40] With Bobbin. Exactly.


Anna Rose [06:40] It is Bobbin, right?


Kostas Kryptos [06:42] Yeah. Myself and Bobbin actually started the project. And Bobbin was obviously the father of all of the engineering there, but I was the inspiration for this project.


And then eventually because of this, Sui made it. A lot of people from Facebook, Google, Apple, many folks around Silicon Valley who wanted to enter the crypto space joined us. And this is where we are now, pretty much a blockchain that has some of the best ever finality times and a lot of innovation.


You will realize that the rate of white papers, even against new ideas about zero knowledge, is literally every one or two weeks. There is a white paper every one or two weeks in Mysten Labs and Sui around the new innovation.


Anna Rose [07:21] You do pop up in quite a few of our ZK Mesh editions.


Kostas Kryptos [07:24] Yes.


Anna Rose [07:24] ZK Mesh is our newsletter that we send out monthly. We're always looking over new research.


Kostas Kryptos [07:28] Exactly. Exactly.


Anna Rose [07:29] And we see your name. It's not always ZK what you release, but when it is, it's in ZK Mesh.


Kostas Kryptos [07:33] Indeed. Indeed. Look, you have to do many things. Obviously, ZK is when you need offchain computations or some privacy. At the same time, we cannot stay on this one.


Very recently, we had the announcement from NIST, hey guys, everybody should switch to post-quantum. And then eventually, as we see, most of the blockchains today are not post-quantum. And then, how do you interact with agencies in the government in five years from now? You cannot. You have to switch.


So we work on this concept as well. ZK, by the way, is part of my story. If you see my team working at the moment on the transitions to a quantum safe like blockchain, ZK is part of it. It is part because we all know Ligero and STARKs are post-quantum secure. So, gradually, we have to switch into these schemes down the road.


Anna Rose [08:19] What do you actually have to switch to make it post-quantum? Like because --


Kostas Kryptos [08:23] Oh, many things.


Anna Rose [08:23] Sui is proof-of-stake, so it's not like the consensus will be broken somehow. But where is the cryptography that would need to be upgraded?


Kostas Kryptos [08:32] It's everywhere. Even if we say sometimes that technically you just need to change the signature scheme, and from ECDSA or EdDSA, you are moving into a post-quantum scheme. This is only one part of the equation.


So one is a signature. At the same time, Sui is agile in the sense that people can do ECDSA, EdDSA, multisigs. They cannot do zkLogin that is currently using Groth16.


Anna Rose [08:55] Which is not quantum secure.


Kostas Kryptos [08:57] It's not quantum secure. Yes. We have also some accumulators internally for the state management, which is also using elliptic curves. There is also -- even the hash functions, as we go into the quantum secure space and level, they have to be longer.


Anna Rose [09:12] Exactly. They have to be a certain kind.


Kostas Kryptos [09:14] There are a few things that should change. And I would say, even at the level of communication between the servers, in some situations you have TLS now. And the TLS and the green bar we see at the top of the browser, it's not quantum secure anymore.


We are still using RSA. If you see all of the certificate authorities in the world are still RSA based, and they are not even elliptic curve based.


So, it means that we have to do a lot of work on multiple streams to make this happen. And at the moment, we have many cool ideas. We're going to discuss a few of them today. Some of them are requiring STARKs, or Ligero, or system with zero-knowledge proofs because it's the easiest way not to change the logic, but still be post-quantum secure. And some of them are just requiring new schemes either for encryption or signatures.


Anna Rose [09:57] That's cool.


Kostas Kryptos [09:57] But it's not one thing. I believe it's like seven or eight places where we have to change.


Anna Rose [10:02] When you talk about kind of making it post-quantum, would you have to be updating each of these systems? Do some of them require a full network upgrade to be able to do it, or can you do it without doing a full network upgrade?


Kostas Kryptos [10:17] So the whole idea is the following. Let's go one by one. The authenticator logic.


So people now have mnemonics, and these mnemonics are converted into elliptic curve signatures. We have ECDSA or EdDSA, like Sui, Aptos, Solana EdDSA. Some of them, Ethereum and Bitcoin are ECDSA. All of them are not post-quantum secure.


So what do you do? We're adding a new flag in the protocol. The new flag might be called -- as Bitcoin had Taproot, it will be called post-quantum authenticator. So everybody who wants to create an address that is now post-quantum, they have to use the new flag.


Anna Rose [10:50] Okay. So users would be -- or applications using it would have to make a choice in their system.


Kostas Kryptos [10:55] When you are creating a new account, obviously --


Anna Rose [10:57] With new accounts. Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [10:58] If you are switching, you have to do something.


Now what's happening with the old accounts? And we know, like Bitcoin, for example, has one very big issue with the sleeping addresses of Satoshi. There are some addresses that are there, they're not doing anything. And imagine if there is a quantum apocalypse one day, someone -- the first target will be the 11 million Bitcoins? This is where people will go to hack, because this is easy money.


So because Sui is using EdDSA, people don't know it. But you know, EdDSA is more friendly to be post-quantum ready compared to ECDSA.


Anna Rose [11:32] Oh, what are you saying? I thought you said ECDSA. You're saying EdDSA.


Kostas Kryptos [11:36] EdDSA. Yeah. EdDSA. Ed25519. As I told you, most of the modern protocols are not using ECDSA anymore. They switched to EdDSA.


And however, EdDSA has a very interesting property. Now I will go slightly deeper into math to explain to people why EdDSA is a better selection, if we want to go post-quantum without the users requiring a new account.


Is it even possible? Some people will say, come on, elliptic curves -- how can someone be quantum secure if they are still using elliptic curves? But there is a very, very --


Anna Rose [12:12] There's a way. Is it like you wrap it in Ligero or something? Do you just have to do an extra step?


Kostas Kryptos [12:16] Yes. So that's the whole idea. Exactly. I mean, now, and obviously, you're so experienced in ZK that you know the answer before I mention it.


Anna Rose [12:24] Sorry.


Kostas Kryptos [12:25] Yeah. No. No. No. That's the interesting part of the story.


So EdDSA, not ECDSA, EdDSA has a very interesting peculiar way of creating the key internally, the private key, which starts from a random seed, and this random seed generates the private key. This is how it typically works.


But this is using a hash function. So technically, if people have the seed which is considered the private key in the EdDSA sector, you can just SNARK, STARK, or do a Ligero over the conversion from the seed to the private key.


And then you can create a STARK-y signature over this. So you completely omit the elliptic curve part, and you only care about the key derivation part.


And now, for the first time, we might have an account that the address maintains exactly the same format, but you are now signing with STARKs. You're not signing with ECDSA or EdDSA.


And this cannot happen with ECDSA, because ECDSA doesn't have this property on key derivation. It has to be a special version of ECDSA, typically deterministic ECDSA.


Anna Rose [13:34] But when you run it, so you're like -- because you have an address, you should sign with that address if you're the owner of it, and you run it through something, so then all of a sudden, it's post-quantum secure. But if someone was to get your non post-quantum version of your -- like if someone accessed it, could they still sign on --


Kostas Kryptos [13:52] No.


Anna Rose [13:53] Like with the -- okay.


Kostas Kryptos [13:54] No. But why no? Because one day, we just press a button without changing anything to the system. But we say, look, everybody who had an EdDSA account, now we don't accept elliptic curve signatures. We only accept the STARK version of your signature.


Anna Rose [14:08] And this can be a decision by the network, basically.


Kostas Kryptos [14:09] Yes. The validators can vote and say, look, we believe that there is a common threat because some countries, some agency is very close to a quantum computer. We're now pressing the button and everybody who used to do elliptic curves, forget this part of the algorithm, erase it from your memory, now you have to use the STARK approach for signing.


Anna Rose [14:25] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [14:26] Even if you keep the same seed, which is very unique. Very unique, but it is possible. So we will see a major advantage of blockchains after Ethereum that used EdDSA because they have this extra like [?] up their sleeves.


Anna Rose [14:41] Little feature, little characteristic.


Kostas Kryptos [14:41] Yes. Exactly.


Anna Rose [14:42] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [14:43] Exactly. So that's one interesting way to do zero knowledge. Not for L2s. Protecting your account against post-quantum.


Anna Rose [14:50] Nice. Well, that's a great start. I mean, so this wasn't the point I was planning on starting with, but I'm really happy. We kind of have -- you've led us into some of these ZK applications within Sui. It's also cool because I've been covering sort of quantum and post-quantum topics in the last few months, and I haven't actually spoken yet to a team about migrating an existing system into a post-quantum one kind of when it's live. So this is a cool example.


Kostas Kryptos [15:19] Exactly. By the way, I call all of the non-quantum secure algorithms. Some of them have this property, I call them quantum ready from now on.


Anna Rose [15:27] Okay. They're not post-quantum, but they're quantum ready.


Kostas Kryptos [15:30] Yes. It's post-quantum ready if you can do this trick with a STARK.


Anna Rose [15:34] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [15:34] It is post-quantum ready without changing your address.


Anna Rose [15:37] Cool. All right. Well, let's kick off with some of the ZK applications, other ZK use cases. I kind of want to start with zkLogin, because you did present it. Actually, our episode was back in late 2023, so almost, whatever, a year and a half ago now.


I'm curious what's happened with the system since. Because in that episode, you did describe it, but I think it was quite fresh. So what's happened with it? How is it being used?


Kostas Kryptos [16:05] Exactly. Now it's the most used zero-knowledge application in the world. That's the result.


Anna Rose [16:09] That's what you're saying, but more than Worldcoin? Because I thought they had that claim somehow.


Kostas Kryptos [16:12] In number of proofs per transaction, no, I don't believe so.


Anna Rose [16:19] Okay.


Kostas Kryptos [016:19] Sui has so many transactions that imagine every single time you're signing a transaction, you need to provide a zero-knowledge proof. I don't believe they have more.


Anna Rose [16:25] Okay. Okay. Cool.


Kostas Kryptos [16:27] They have to create an account, of course. But every single time you're signing, I'm not sure they're doing the same. So on verification side and how many times you have to do this on the blockchain, I think Sui is by far more used.


Anna Rose [16:39] That's actually interesting that you're saying you need to create a ZKP each time though. Because like zkLogin, as you presented, it was more like when you're logging into a website, or you're doing something where you need to use your account in a very tangible way, you're creating the ZKP, you're doing something there.


But how come with zkLogin, you're actually creating a ZK proof for every transaction?


Kostas Kryptos [17:03] Yeah. Let me explain to you what's happening.


Anna Rose [17:05] Yeah. Has it changed or is it like --


Kostas Kryptos [17:08] No. No. No. I will explain.


Anna Rose [17:08] Was it always like that?


Kostas Kryptos [17:08] The verification is happening many times, but I will explain why.


So when we do log in with Google, log in with Facebook, in the background, what's happening is Facebook and Google is giving you something. A small piece of data that says, okay, it's you, Kostas. You have an account on Sui, and that's your email and that's your name and so on.


Obviously, you don't want to put all of this information onchain, because then people will identify you. We want to offer privacy.


At the same time, this doesn't give you a public key in order to sign transactions. It's only something that Google states, but it doesn't give you the option to add the public key. We added the public key inside this result from Google and Facebook, and then, we had to SNARK it. So we added the Groth16 on top of this.


But every single time you're signing a transaction, you need to have a proof that your public key is part of this particular thing that Google sent you.


So when you go onchain, you have to verify the zero-knowledge proof because the transactions are not signed with ZK, they are signed with a public key. But to ensure that the public key is the correct one, you have to verify zero knowledge.


Now you will tell me, yes, for every single time you're using the same public key, you need to generate a proof? No. Obviously, smart people are caching their zero knowledge, and they submit it on the blockchain.


Anna Rose [18:23] Caching it. Okay. I see.


Kostas Kryptos [18:24] Yes. But the blockchain has to verify it.


Anna Rose [18:27] Okay. So the verification.


Kostas Kryptos [18:29] The verification is happening a lot more times than anything else, because it's happening on every transaction.


Anna Rose [18:33] Got it.


Kostas Kryptos [18:34] So that's the whole idea here. And obviously, because you're caching it in the same session, you don't need to have all of the CPU requirements for zero-knowledge proofs. It just needs to happen once when you open your wallet. But verification wise, yes. I don't believe on the blockchain anything else is doing more than us at the moment.


Anna Rose [18:52] Fair.


Tarun Chitra [18:52] I had one quick question, which is, I think of login as an auth format where it's individual user logs into service. So the topology is hub-and-spoke. There's the hub of the thing that's logged into, and then there's all the users.


Now, in a world where people are delegating their credentials to third parties, whether the third parties are AI kind of apps acting on their behalf and maybe logging in via tool calls or not, whether they're delegating it to third parties that are human or companies, how do you think about building sort of access control system on top of logins such that you can do this kind of delegation system when you have -- or even --


I mean, the simplest version of this, that is live and used in crypto, is a lot of the Telegram trading bots where they trade on your behalf, but you grant them some certificate authority for some amount of time, for some amount of protocols or whatever.


So how do you think about that expansion? Because, to me, that's sort of where now you have way more interesting topologies of interaction between the users and the protocols. But also, it's like the complexity for the user goes up. So there's kind of the two dimensions you have to --


Kostas Kryptos [20:05] You are right. Look, zkLogin, by the way, regarding the UX, it's actually removing all of the friction on remembering passwords and everything.


So we realized for the first time that a lot of people, they're now using the blockchain. You don't even need to remember passwords. You're just familiar with log in with Google and Facebook just because you do that in your everyday life.


And then, we had a few companies that they were targeting a particular part of the population. Imagine Red Bull was one of them. Red Bull Racing. And they had to create a campaign and they said, look, there is no way more than 1 or 2% of our users are going to remember a mnemonic. There is no way.


There is already too much friction in the blockchain. And I understand that on the background, there might be a lot of math. Tarun, I agree totally with you. But we try to hide it from the user. The user doesn't even need to see a blockchain transaction is happening, because they just log in with Google, and automatically, they have a way to authenticate.


Now, obviously, we don't want users to only rely on Facebook and Google, and maybe they want extra security like I want, and Google and Facebook. I want to log in with Google and Facebook. So they both need to collude, and they also need to collude with my wallet provider like 3 out of 3 collusion in order to cheat my account.


And then, in Sui, what we did is we created this native authenticator, which is multisig. So technically, an application can just request from the user log in with your two most major, I don't know, OAuth mechanism that you have, and you're going to have an account.


Now, again, this might not be enough because what's happening with zkLogin is we're giving a short period of time where you can reuse the result from Google. We don't want you to reuse this for years, because the sessions are expiring on Google and so on. So we created a new system that is called zkAt. Anna, this is the new innovation that we had.


Anna Rose [21:56] ZK Authenticator. Yeah. 


Kostas Kryptos [21:58] ZK Authenticator. But because it's Z-K-A-T like from authentication, we call it zkAt because it's easier to spell it.


Now, zkAt came exactly for the question that Tarun made here about the complexity and how we're changing policies, how we can provide new updatable formats, because we might say, look, it's 2 out of 3, but tomorrow I want to make it 1 out of 2, and the day after tomorrow, because I had a divorce with my fiance, I need to make it in 1 out of 1, and I have to make some changes.


Yes. These are things that are coming, I agree with you. So zkAt is pretty much an evolution of zkLogin to provide custom and updatable logic, which previously was very difficult because by the time you're updating your key, technically, you're changing your address. How do you keep your address and still maintaining your key?


There are two ways. One is you're doing it with account abstraction. So you have a way that there is a smart contract that you control and you are changing there the logic. But every single time that you're updating the logic, people can see it. Probably they will know, oh, you had a divorce. Why did you send your authentication? Because everything is public on the blockchain. Even the authentication has to be protected from the blockchain.


Do you know how many people I heard that I wanted to have a safe wallet, which is a multisig wallet? You remember what happened with --


Anna Rose [23:17] Yeah. On Ethereum.


Kostas Kryptos [23:19] Yes. On Ethereum, and what happened with Bybit and all of this stuff. But I don't want people to know how many keys are there. And if there are any extra rules, like after $1,000 you need 3 out of 5. After $10,000, you need something else.


zkAt is actually solving these problems, because at the moment, we don't have great MPC solutions that are working with conditions. Yes. There is the threshold MPC model where you can only do k out of n, but by the time you're adding more complexity, we don't have good MPC protocols. So you need to find another way to do that.


Anna Rose [23:53] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [23:53] And then, we had a few banks as partners who asked, whatever we do, we cannot easily use an account abstraction multisig wallet because people will see we're 7 out of 10. We want to hide even this, but we also want to hide the conditions when 5 out of 10 are signing, when 7, when the condition is becoming very strict and you need 10 out of 10, all of this stuff.


And then we tried, Tarun, to create a new system. It was very difficult originally. We thought it's impossible, to tell you the truth, because you cannot solve it with STARKs, by the way. It can only be solved at the moment with things like Groth16 that has a trusted setup.


Believe it or not, for the first time, we said, people believe that Groth16 is dead because there is a trusted setup and there are all of these complexities, who is running the committee for the setup and everything. But then we said, look, let's use this as a feature. Why it can be used as a feature? Do we understand here why zkAt --


Anna Rose [24:51] Is it because of the -- you could run another trusted setup in a way to reset it?


Kostas Kryptos [24:56] It's your account, Anna. And because it's your account, you can run the setup in your head. You don't need other people to run the ceremony for you. It's your account.


So you are running the circuit. You are running the public parameters. You are running the verification key. You are keeping the toxic waste because it's yours. And then, you can define the circuit to be 2 out of 3 with other two entities that are helping you, but you don't give them the toxic waste. So it's only you that you can update the policy. Because in the first place, we want to protect only you.


So in all of the other crypto systems, what's happening on L2s, you don't trust the issuer of the circuit because you might believe that this bridging L2 actually will steal your money.


But now we're talking about your authentication. So for the first time, you control even your circuit. So we said, wow, we need a place where people can control their circuits. Can we go to STARKs where there is no common reference string? No. We cannot, because you don't control anything. There is one place where you control something, and this is Groth16.


Anna Rose [25:58] Something with a trusted setup. Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [26:01] Yes. You control the trusted setup because it's your trusted setup. So, technically we said, wow, zkAt for the first time gets a toxic waste, and the toxic waste is converted into potable water. You can drink it now. You need it. You need the toxic waste now.


Anna Rose [26:15] You actually need it.


Kostas Kryptos [26:16] Yeah.


Anna Rose [26:17] I mean, this is a very interesting feature, but I just want to check, like the question that Tarun was asking though was really about agents. And I'm wondering, does this satisfy your question, Tarun?


Tarun Chitra [26:27] I think the reason it kind of is, it somewhat satisfies it. But I do think there's going to be this kind of thing where people probably really don't want to think about their policy settings.


Kostas Kryptos [26:38] That's true. That's true.


Tarun Chitra [26:40] And like I'm not sure how you -- I think in a world where people have this interaction where I go to a new app, I log in, I have to click authorize, whatever, and then I use it, that you don't have to think that much about complex policy. It's like, yes, maybe for some big company type of thing.


Kostas Kryptos [26:58] Who do you think will help you on this? Do you know what I personally think? AI will help you on this. I have a feeling all of the wallets of the future have to have AI embedded.


Tarun Chitra [27:08] For sure. But in order -- there's a chicken and the egg problem. In order to get the AI to do all these things on your behalf, you also need to have it have a policy for which accounts you're giving it permission to.


You may today be like Cursor, you're allowed to log into my GitHub and Twitter because you're allowed to post whenever I make a pull request. But, oh, my Twitter credentials got hacked, so I need to actually remove Cursor tomorrow or something.


My point is there's also -- there's almost a meta learning thing of how much delegation you want to give to each AI. And that part is the part, I guess, I'm still not sure how you would do it.


Kostas Kryptos [27:45] That's 100% -- okay. Now I agree with your extended view of this. Look, we have the mechanism. In my opinion, when I say the wallets have to be smart, you have to have an agent that you trust.


This agent that you trust will have to do all of the digging on the web. Hey, you're using -- you trust it, right? It's running on your phone, it's not running somewhere else. It tells you Cursor is hacked or something is hacked. We have to -- hey, Tarun, we have to change the policy. I know we're using it for connecting to GitHub.


And then, the agent will tell you to do all of this stuff. And maybe by the time we're trusting so much the agent, the agent can even take decisions without you knowing about it.


Eventually, we're getting into a cyborg situation. People are going to think with their brain, but we're going to have aided decisions because of AI running in our devices or inside our body. I've even seen companies now doing embedded AI, literally under your skin pretty much like a tattoo.


And we're going to see this. I have a feeling that the current landscape of wallets has been built before AI's supremacy. And we have to go into a state that Phantom and all of the big wallet vendors out there, they have to give you an agent, that this agent will help you in taking these decisions because humans are impossible to maintain this knowledge in their head.


I mean, Tarun is right that we're giving so much access to agents here and there, and as it's becoming more common, you cannot even work, you cannot even operate. I cannot even imagine one of my engineers not using AI anymore to code.


Tarun Chitra [29:15] On the other hand, every time I use Cursor, I don't even know what tools I'm using. I can't even tell where -- would you write -- like if I look at the tool calls that are being made, and then I go look at my IP out, like netstat packet sniffing, I'm like, okay, this is making like 500 million more outgoing calls than I expected.


Kostas Kryptos [29:35] Maybe Cursor needs to have a personal agent as well, or people will have their personal agents that they can connect them to any software that they are using, and this agent is pretty much your other self.


Tarun Chitra [29:47] I think of it as your key management concierge. That's like figuring out --


Kostas Kryptos [29:52] Yes.


Anna Rose [29:52] Nice way to put it. 


Tarun Chitra [29:54] But that's, I guess, what I'm saying. It's there needs to almost be a separate AI to dictate what the key management should be.


Kostas Kryptos [30:00] And this AI is your AI, right?


Tarun Chitra [30:02] Yes.


Kostas Kryptos [30:02] It has to run on your devices. You have to trust it. You have to do all of the stuff. Pretty much your PA, like your personal assistant.


Tarun Chitra [30:08] Yeah.


Anna Rose [30:08] But going to your point, Kostas, about like in order to update it, you could change the access control because of this feature of Groth16 because you could do a new trusted setup, and you keep the toxic waste.


Kostas Kryptos [30:16] Yes. Exactly. If you have the toxic waste.


Anna Rose [30:20] But could the AI agent be updating on your behalf, wouldn't that be very dangerous? Because then you don't have --


Kostas Kryptos [30:26] I totally agree.


Anna Rose [30:26] You don't have that toxic waste.


Kostas Kryptos [30:29] I totally agree. And probably for accessing the toxic waste it might ask you, I don't know what is the UX there for the average population who are not financially literal or technically literal. We have to fix this.


Obviously, we're getting into a world where we have to coexist with another species that humans created. It's AI. Now, that's why we see there is a lot of different work streams. Other people are building robots, other are building personal assistants. Everybody is trying to find a niche market to have a startup there.


I have a feeling that we will find eventually solution. And eventually, we have the cryptography. The cryptography of MPC, the cryptography of zero knowledge, maybe you will have multiple personal assistants. All of them are independent, coming from different companies, and then they have to take a collaborative decision.


Look, Tarun, we have to change our strategy because Google was hacked, and Google is used in 20 different places in your profile. I'm voting, and then ask your other personal assistants, which are AI agents, to vote on this, and then they will take a collaborative decision for you. It will happen.


And then we have MPC. They can communicate with MPC and probably some zero-knowledge proofs, because the other problem we have is the computations. This cannot easily happen on the blockchain. We might want zero knowledge to prove that you ran the AI logic and there was not human hand intervening on the result of the AI.


This is another thing that we're working, by the way, here. We're having ZK verification of offchain computations, but are computations that are not in Move necessarily. They're not in the Move language. It might be on something else. So yeah, another application of ZK.


Anna Rose [32:12] Yeah. Before we -- I want to just make sure we fully cover zkAt though. So you've introduced it. I do want to now -- I think if you can explain a bit more, because I think you introduced it in this context of like --


Kostas Kryptos [32:23] Let me explain. Yeah


Anna Rose [32:24] Updating access control. But if you wanted -- yeah. What is it? You've sort of said there are MPC, like multisig-type wallets, but they're too public. I'm guessing this is not MPC?


Kostas Kryptos [32:38] Let me explain how it works. So let's assume that you want to have your own custom logic. You create a circuit. Now we have many ways to create circuits. I mean we have languages like Succinct, Cairo. There are many different languages, high level languages where people can write their logic.


Anna Rose [32:55] I think Succinct is Rust, actually, but yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [32:57] Even in Rust. Yes. Even in Rust. You run whatever logic you want, and then you convert it, you get a circuit, and then you can get your public parameters, you can get the verification key and everything. Or you can fold it eventually to a Groth16, and the Groth16 is folding into whatever you want.


Now, after you create the circuit, let's assume that you created some logic. You have the toxic waste, because assuming that we're using Groth16, you run the ceremony in your head, you created the toxic waste for this particular ceremony, you keep it, and then let's assume that the logic was a 2 out of 3.


So in this 2 out of 3, you pin the public keys from the collaborators of you, the other two entities that are helping you to recover. You are asking them every single time -- sorry, it's a 2 out of 3 implemented as a zero-knowledge proof circuit. Internally, the circuit is verifying 2 out of 3 signatures from this particular 3 public keys.


And then, you're having the verification key and the verification key is hashed into an address. That's your address. The address is the hash of your verification key that you are the only person who can create it, and you are the only person we can verify against this verification key.


Now, whenever you need to sign, the other people don't know what you're doing. There is no MPC, right? You're just asking them, give me two signatures because I want to sign this message.


Anna Rose [34:14] And then it will be hashed.


Kostas Kryptos [34:16] And then -- no, you are getting the signatures from them. There is not MPC. You are putting them in your prover. You are also putting your signature in your prover. If you have 2 out of 3, the prover will give a good result, and so it will verify onchain.


So imagine we created a logic where the verification key is your address. If you satisfy the logic offchain, you just provide -- as a signature, you just provide this as an input to the transaction, and along with the transaction, the blockchain verifies it.


Nobody knows your logic though. Only probably your collaborators if they ask you, are you using a 2 out of 3? But you might even hide this from them. You might do something else that they don't know.


But let's assume that it's a 2 out of 3, and at least your collaborators, they know the logic. And one day you might say, look, I want to change the logic. from now on. I want to use something else.


So what you're doing is you have the toxic waste. You can now go back, create another circuit that results to the same verification key.


Anna Rose [35:14] Oh, interesting. But not a 2 out of 3. You're basically like, you're using the fact that these systems, if you have the toxic waste, are kind of hackable, can be changed.


Kostas Kryptos [35:23] Yes. Exactly. Exactly.


Anna Rose [35:24] But now you're hacking it yourself and it's yours.


Kostas Kryptos [35:25] You can have multiple proving keys going to the same verification key. That's the whole idea. And then because of this, now you can have another logic which goes to another proving key and that's this proving key is different logic now.


Anna Rose [35:37] How complicated can the logic be though, in such a system? Can you actually create something like these thresholds? If we're doing XYZ, then I only need 2 out of 3, but if it's something else --


Kostas Kryptos [35:48] Yes. Anything. Anything.


Anna Rose [35:48] Then I want 4 out of 5. You can create a more -- it's not that you have to go in each time and update it.


Kostas Kryptos [35:54] Well, you update it only if you need to update it. I believe most of it --


Anna Rose [35:59] Yeah. But I mean, could you create a whole list of logic?


Kostas Kryptos [36:02] Yeah. You can do whatever you want.


Anna Rose [036:03] Depending on context. And then just do one update with the toxic waste and include all of that.


Kostas Kryptos [36:10] Exactly. The reality is you can do many things. You can even do updates on things that you haven't predicted before. That's the other idea.


I mean, it's possible with zkAt, you can just create a new proving key because you just added a new condition that you never had at the very beginning, and you can convert your scheme into the new condition. And that's how we can personally have an updatable circuit, updatable authentication logic.


If you are asking me, though, most of the companies, they don't care about the update, they do care about the private authentication logic. This is more important for most of them. I believe if you end up into a point that you want to change your conditions, like down the road, maybe you're also comfortable on switching addresses, it's fine.


But if you're not, yes, zkAt has a version that is called zkAt+. You can also do the updates if you hold the toxic waste. Some people might decide with zkAt not to keep the toxic waste, because they don't want this to be updatable.


Anna Rose [37:05] Okay.


Kostas Kryptos [37:06] So zkAt works with either updatable circuits, or if you want updatable, you use the version that is called zkAt+. And the zkAt+ has the updatability as well.


Anna Rose [37:16] Interesting. Is that in the original paper?


Kostas Kryptos [37:18] Yes. Both of them are.


Tarun Chitra [37:20] You gave me an idea for a sort of odd thing, which is, imagine I actually wanted to have a random number of signers because I have, say, some set of agents that are working on my behalf, but I only need a random subset of them to sign. And my security model is that like, hey, as long as enough of them are live, I should get a real signature.


One way, I think, think you kind of see this happening when you're using AI tools, as you'll oftentimes see, when you look at these things that are routing across multiple models, you will see an aggregation that comes back, and you could imagine that that gets signed, the aggregation of a joint step by fanning out and joining back in.


Can you do random numbers of signers where you don't know ahead of time, but you kind of -- because there is a sense in which in this model where the number of signatories could be not known ahead of time.


Kostas Kryptos [38:18] Something that you can do, I don't know if this works for the random signers, but I will give you an example.


Let's assume that I started with a 1 out of 1. It was only me, I'm using zkAt. Nobody knows it's 1 out of 1. Some people might believe I do it on purpose, that I have a threshold wallet. Nobody knows, but --


And then, suddenly I need to add more people. I don't know the number originally, but then you tell me when you say random, it's converted into 3 out of 3 or something else.


For audits, they tell you, me as a Deloitte, I need to sign this transaction, and I need you to sign this transaction, and only then I know it's you. Then probably with your toxic waste, you can update your circuit into something.


However, imagine that you have the toxic waste. You, as a user, you can still cheat. You can still use the 1 out of 1 because you know everything. It's your account.


So in that sense, if it's like something in your logic that is controlled by the auditor and not you, it's one of the applications that zkAt doesn't work for you, because we need to find authentication logics where you control everything and nobody else can dictate to you what they want to sign on behalf of you.


This is one of the limitations because by the time you're having the toxic waste, you can just replace the circuit to something else.


Tarun Chitra [39:31] Yeah. Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [39:31] But it doesn't even require a signature, so you bypass the prerequisite that they ask you a random number of signers. Yes. You can convert this to that, but if you hold the toxic waste, you cannot.


If you don't hold the toxic waste, and you have the toxic waste between you and the auditor, then it is possible. So we might ask some users that you are creating accounts where the toxic waste beforehand, even on day one, it's only between you and some auditor or some issuer or someone else.


Nobody can cheat. You have to collude both of you, but at the same time, you can both use zkAt+ to update the circuit anytime you want in the future because the auditor wants to add another auditor or they want to do something else.


This is possible. zkAt, although we say, yes, the user has a toxic waste in their head and they don't need the ceremony. The nice benefit of zkAt, another property, is you can have limited size committees for your circuits between you and other entities that they are helping your account. In this particular case, it might be an auditor.


So yes, if your account -- sorry, the ceremony between you and the auditor, yes, we have some trust that if both of you don't collude, you can still update the zkAt circuit in the future. It is possible for this to happen. And in the future, it has to be, again, the two of you that will run the new ceremony, probably with some MPC now, because now I have two users running a new ceremony. Right?


Tarun Chitra [40:54] Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [40:55] But without this step, you cannot do it, unfortunately.


Tarun Chitra [40:58] Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. That makes sense. I'm only asking this type of stuff because I think the traditional crypto interaction has been assumed it was like one user, one key. Or one user, many keys.


But it might actually be one user, many users, and the number of users is these people you delegate keys to, and that's dynamically changing.


Anna Rose [41:19] Wouldn't it just be a threshold though? Wouldn't you just say like, oh, a certain number of those random, like the total number that might be issuing something could change?


Kostas Kryptos [41:27] I believe --


Anna Rose [41:28] But you need to hit a threshold.


Kostas Kryptos [41:29] I can answer, I think. So, Tarun, he's right. There are two reasons to have a multisig, Anna. One is because you want to protect against yourself losing the key, but it's still your account. You're helping guardians, you're having people who help your account.


But there are indeed, if you go to your bank account now, sometimes you can have a bank where it's you and your partner are owners of this account. So it's now two people owning this multisig.


In the second part, where it's multiple owners of a multisig account, they are not just guardians of your account, they own part of the account. Then you need the trusted setup to happen between all of the owners. Otherwise, because now it's not only one person that owns the account.


So imagine what's happening now with the -- there is a wallet that is using MPC. I think it's called Zengo. I don't know if you know Zengo, the wallet. The Zengo Wallet, it's your account, and you need two other places, two other parties to help you recover. But it's your account.


zkAt is a great application for this. You are creating the circuit. You're having two guardians that are helping you recover.


But there might be another type of multisig, which is me, my son and my wife, and we have a 2 out of 3 ownership over the account. It's still the same multisig, but conceptually the ownership is not only on me now to create the circuit, it's also in my wife and it's also in my kid. So we need to run a ceremony between the three of us.


Anna Rose [42:54] I still don't know if this answers that question, though, of the random number.


Tarun Chitra [42:57] So the reason I say random number is you go into -- again, I don't know why I keep only using Cursor, but Cursor is a good interface because it's easy to kind of imagine how it works. So Cursor right now has their own model which farms out different coding tasks, sub coding tasks to different models.


So like, oh, okay, Claude is really good at debugging stuff, but it's horrible at doing numerical math. So I'll only farm the kind of run test case, small context things to Claude. The large things I'll send to Gemini or OpenAI.


Now, the number of calls it makes depends on the structure of the code it's writing. But the structure of the code it's writing actually, it's learning incrementally. So it might be like, okay, in the beginning, I'm farming everything to Claude. Now I'm farming everything to five different workers, one Claude, one Gemini, three OpenAI. And then, a few steps later, okay, maybe I'm going to run a DeepSeek thing.


And my point is the number of people who are involved in like -- if you wanted your code signed by each of them incrementally, the number of participants is dynamically changing based on the code it's outputting. So you might not actually be able to know ahead of time in this type of case.


Kostas Kryptos [44:07] That's indeed -- look, if you don't know the owners of the account, but -- if it is your account, by the way, it's your account, in this particular case, you just need other people to help you again.


Tarun Chitra [44:15] Yeah. You're delegating some of the --


Kostas Kryptos [44:16] Yes. It's fine that you provide the new circuit for them. Now it works. If all of them, however, had access, some financial access on this account, which is not the case if I understand correctly in the case, for example, then it's more complicated.


We cannot -- if we have an updatable committee of ownership, like originally it was myself alone in the account, and then my wife has access to my account, and then my kid has access to the account, then we're talking about change of ownership, because the ownership changes. One day, I might also leave. I was originally, but now I'm not a part of the account.


So for this, it's a more difficult problem. I don't believe humanity has a solution to this. Unless you're having another ceremony, that the toxic waste is shared between the ceremony and you trust this ceremony to do the updates on the circuit. Only then, this is compatible with zkAt.


Anna Rose [45:04] But he's talking about delegation, so he's not talking about ownership.


Kostas Kryptos [45:07] Yeah. If it's delegation, it's fine. You can delegate.


Tarun Chitra [45:10] Yeah.


Anna Rose [45:11] So but would it be -- I mean, it would probably be kind of clunky, because you'd have to run the thing again. You basically have to do an upgrade once you know the number.


But it sort of still doesn't solve your problem, Tarun, because you're saying you won't know the number beforehand. Here, it's like you have to wait till you know the number, I think, to update it.


Kostas Kryptos [45:29] Yes. But you will know the number. I mean, they will tell you that it's DeepSeek now. Create a new circuit with DeepSeek as well as part. This is --


Tarun Chitra [45:36] Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.


Anna Rose [45:37] Okay.


Kostas Kryptos [45:37] It is random, but at the time you're creating the circuit, you already know the number.


Tarun Chitra [45:41] Yeah. It's like you know -- it's almost like it's random, but you know the seed. You're getting the sequence of seeds you know, so like you're fine. I get that that works.


Kostas Kryptos [45:49] For this, it works.


Tarun Chitra [045:50] I guess I'm just trying to think through like in a world where your financial transactions are done this way, where you're not signing ever, you're only delegating and then you're delegating infrequently, and then these things are running on your behalf, you do have to construct this kind -- how do you manage that? And that, [?] how it's going to work.


Kostas Kryptos [46:05] You shouldn't -- look, all of this should happen in your wallet seamlessly. You shouldn't even see this is happening. Now, do you trust this? Do you trust it? I don't know. [?] That's the only question.


Tarun Chitra [46:15] I don't know. Exactly. Exactly. I don't know. You do run into this kind of like who watches the watchmen problem of who watches -- who trusts the policy choosing agent, whatever. And no cryptography alone can really help you with that.


Kostas Kryptos [46:30] True.


Tarun Chitra [46:31] Sorry for the random hypotheticals. I guess I'm just trying --


Kostas Kryptos [46:33] No. No. No. It's a good question actually. Maybe I should update the paper with all of these questions from now. I will go back and hear the podcast, and I will ask my team, let's have a Q&A at the end of the --


Anna Rose [46:43] Let's think about this one.


Kostas Kryptos [46:44] Yeah. Yeah.


Anna Rose [46:45] Yeah. Work it through.


Tarun Chitra [46:47] I mean, the other thing is, I think to me, this is kind of the interesting use case of zkAt is these types of situations where you maybe want to update, because, in general, I think even after, say, hacks of like Bybit-style things, there is a long time before people can actually do these updates. And it becomes very annoying to do.


If you looked at kind of people's changes in Gnosis Safe policies post Bybit hack, it was like it was kind of slow to actually occur. And I do feel like if you imagine you had a circuit ready that was like, in emergency change signers to X, that was already pre-signed, you would already -- you know, stuff like that I think is enabled by this, that is currently kind of not really around.


Kostas Kryptos [47:35] That I agree. But imagine that if you are running the ceremony in your head is by far faster than a real ceremony. It's only you.


Tarun Chitra [47:41] Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [47:42] So technically it's not like ours to compute the common reference string. You can do it faster now.


Tarun Chitra [47:49] Yeah. I just think there's a lot of security stuff also like this. These like, in response to attacks, automatically adjust policy type thing. Like if more than X percent of this wallet moves, which is likely a hack, then adjust the policy to be n of n from k of n.


Anna Rose [48:07] That would be cool. I don't know, is that already -- I mean, this would be in your logic though, right? This would be something you would decide and design before.


Tarun Chitra [48:13] Yeah. You have to decide ahead of time.


Kostas Kryptos [48:15] By the way, if zkAt existed, and let's assume that Bybit had this in their hands, technically, they could have another logic that if there is an amount that we haven't seen in the past, and imagine you're providing the transaction history as an input, be a bit more aggressive and try to ask why. Don't sound sign it blindly. You probably need all of the signers, or you probably need to have a different alert on the wallet that this is not common.


Anyway, many things were wrong in the Bybit situation, if you ask me. I have my own opinion on this. I don't want to get into that now.


Tarun Chitra [48:50] I mean, I will say, in this world where you can delegate access, you shouldn't have wallets with a billion dollars on that. A single wallet with billion dollars.


Kostas Kryptos [48:59] Yeah. Exactly. The first problem there, it was their mistake, in my opinion, that they didn't split the balances. You cannot have one wallet on -- everything on one wallet. Who does this? Bybit does it, it seems. But I don't want to see that again.


And imagine I'm very -- because Tarun, as you know, I'm also very sensitive on proof of solvency and all of this stuff. I feel really bad why we're still doing the same mistakes.


Tarun Chitra [49:24] Yeah. I guess another point is, I could compose a proof of solvency -- a proof of insolvency below some threshold and use that to adjust my OAuth parameters. Somehow I don't understand -- because a lot of the MPC, centralized MPC wallets do that. You go to Fireblocks or something, there's the policy -- you can choose your policies and then they get executed, like, oh, this means someone else hacked, so stop -- pause my account. 


Somehow that hasn't really hit a lot of -- and to me, that seems very easy to do in zkAt. But correct me if I'm wrong. Seems kind of like --


Kostas Kryptos [50:00] Yeah. It is. It is easy. In zkAt, you can define all of these policies originally. If you don't like something, you add it down the road. It's your account. You can add whatever you want down the road, and then eventually, there will be a final state where it feels safe to continue with that.


Tarun Chitra [50:15] I mean, I also -- and not to keep harping on this Cursor thing, but I tried to write a Circom circuit in Cursor the other day, and it worked. It only took me half an hour. I was actually pretty impressed that I compiled.


Look, I'm not going to say it was a secure circuit and that there was no attacks and whatever, I'm just saying I got it to compile and do like -- and it was just doing some basic DeFi thing.


But I was actually -- I feel like people aren't going to write circuits anyway. I know the ZKVM version of the world where people aren't going to write circuits because they write it for VM, but I don't even think they're going to write that. I think it's one level higher.


Kostas Kryptos [50:50] You make an interesting point. So what I believe will happen, these circuits will exist. The problem is, zkAt, what it solves is you don't even know what circuit am I using. Even if you created your own circuit, Tarun, I can get it, but I can [?] seed it with my own stuff, so nobody knows we're using the same logic.


So if we have templates, people can do all of the composition, and do whatever they want eventually by far easier logic. Because I sense that most of the conditions will be very similar. I mean, we want, I don't know, 100 different flavors of authentication. It's not millions and billions of authentication logic.


And then maybe we're going to have a repository of all of the known authentication logics, and then people will have to compose between them, or use them as they are. The problem is zkAt doesn't reveal what did you use as a proving key. That's the benefit.


Anna Rose [51:47] What is zkAt today?


Kostas Kryptos [51:48] It's a paper.


Anna Rose [51:49] It's a paper. Exactly. I just wondered if it was implemented or it's a concept right now still.


Kostas Kryptos [51:55] There is implementation internally, but it's not live in Sui yet.


Anna Rose [51:59] How will it be? How will it be rolled out? Will it be like part of zkLogin in a way?


Kostas Kryptos [52:05] No. No. No. A new authenticator. So in Sui, we do have -- I mean, pretty much like Bitcoin. Bitcoin 2 means something, 3 means something, 4 means Taproot. I mean, you have some flags.


So in Sui we already have 5, 6 flags. There is the EdDSA flag, the ECDSA k1, the ECDSA k2, multisig, zkLogin. There are already 5 flags. You are adding a new authenticator. This will be, for example, the 6th flag. And the 6th flag will say, okay, I accept zkAt addresses.


And then there will be a 7th like authenticator, which is, oh, this is the post-quantum algorithm for Sui. And then there will be an 8th, which might be something else. So that's how it works on Sui.


Anna Rose [52:44] Got it. And would it be mostly like a developer building on Sui with Move, I guess? Like who uses it? Because, does the end user directly use zkAt, or is zkAt built into a system like a wallet?


Kostas Kryptos [52:58] We have to launch SDKs on JavaScript and Rust for people to use it.


Anna Rose [53:02] Okay.


Kostas Kryptos [53:03] Every single time, this is what you do. Even on Bitcoin and Ethereum, you do have JavaScript libraries where they work as the SDK for the people to do signatures either on their apps or on their wallets. We're going to have a JavaScript version of zkAt where people are going to take it and use it directly.


People, I mean, the actual -- the end user doesn't even know what's happening. It's just a JavaScript file running on your wallet.


Anna Rose [53:26] You did tweet about the -- and you sort of mentioned it here, the ZK auth flavors, different types of ZK auth, I guess. Are you building a lot of these?


Kostas Kryptos [53:38] Yes.


Anna Rose [53:39] Would you be adding these into -- or are you expecting sort of the community to build them themselves?


Kostas Kryptos [53:44] No. No. It's collaborative again. So as you can imagine, coming from Silicon Valley and having people that used to be at Stanford, Berkeley, all of the big -- Cornell and many other universities. We do have cryptographers. It's actually very heavy on research, the team.


So we have an internal team that is working alone, but we have the research grants where we're working with other universities. I know for sure some of them that have been granted already are doing other types of authentication.


For example, we do have passcode now, passkeys. Passkeys is log in with your face, and then automatically you have an account.


But at the same time, we found another magic version of passkey where you log in with your face, and we delegate your face into an ephemeral public key. And then for the session, let's assume that you're doing a DeFi or you are playing a game, you don't want your face every single time you're making a transaction. So you have to create a delegation mechanism that this passkey is giving me access to a public key that for this DeFi is giving you access for one hour up to the amount of $5,000.


So we're going to create these types of logic, and then everybody can use whatever it works for them. That's the whole idea, but it's not alone. Alone, yes, we're doing some big researches like zkAt and others, but I have a feeling that the feedback lately is coming more often than I expected from existing universities that they're also doing ZK or passkeys or MPC. These are typically the technologies we're using.


There might be even a TEE authentication, like trusted executed environment authentication. Why not? Where people can write their authentication logic into Python or Java, and then you run it on Sui because there is either zero knowledge or you have a [?] [a]trust executed environment signature for this.


So many -- I believe at the end of the 2, 3 year trip in the future, we might have even 10 authenticators at Sui based on the requirements.


Anna Rose [55:38] Nice.


Tarun Chitra [55:39] It does seem there's something that has been missing. I sort of see the ZK and generally, the ZK teams are sort of thinking of this bottoms up of how do I generate the right auth and signatures for these types of systems? How do I like give you proof of set inclusion of a private -- or membership of some public key, or some set of public keys, whatever.


But there's a top down approach which is, I think, how the centralized authentication companies oftentimes think of things, which is, I have a graph of interactions of nodes that are holding resources, assets, whatever, and I have a set of users, and the graph is changing over time.


And how do I construct an auth scheme based on that usage pattern versus making auth schemes and then mapping a usage pattern to an auth scheme.


So there's sort of a difference between how people in decentralized world think of auth versus people in centralized world where they're like, here's a bunch of usages, so we're going to make policies that match those usages.


So I'm just kind of curious how you think about bridging that gap because I do think that is something I always -- like I think Web2 people have a lot of trouble understanding about crypto, but then crypto people also don't exactly have a solution for, in my opinion.


Kostas Kryptos [56:58] This is 100% true. I don't know if you noticed, but very recently the Google team introduced a new wallet that is using Ligero. Did you notice that?


Anna Rose [57:05] Yeah. They just came on the show last week.


Kostas Kryptos [57:06] Did they? Okay. Of course. Of course. So as you can imagine, in my opinion, things like zkLogin inspired some of them. Because with zkLogin, there was also a collaborative post with Google because we worked with Google originally.


Google was -- even if I'm coming from Facebook, the first company that I tried zkLogin against was Google. And then we had so many back to back meetings to explain to them, okay, we need to see how your OAuth works and so on.


So in my opinion, we also seeded the element of, guys, do ZK even for your own wallets in the Web2 world, and, Tarun, to tell you the truth, they didn't take it negatively, originally. I mean they said, okay, look, if zkLogin works, we are also doing a lot of stuff -- in the very beginning, they didn't do ZK, by the way. I know for sure because I was interacting with the team.


But then eventually, you see, they got into the ZK part. In my opinion, we're influencing -- the crypto, one of the best things that it has done to the society is not necessarily into trading. I think because a lot of money has been spent into hiring the best cryptographers, the best engineers in the world, more than what NSA is doing, more than Web2 companies are doing, the innovations that are happening on crypto are now coming into Web2.


And I'm very happy about this. I love it. I love the fact that Google is using now even for Web2 authentication, zero knowledge.


So how do you bridge the gap? ZK Email, zkLogin and probably zkTLS are the three -- and zkAt now, are the 3, 4 ways of eventually interacting with Web2, even if it's part of the authentication. As we see companies like Google, and probably some others in the future, even Worldcoin and others that they are trying to do ZK for user identification authentication, but also the identity part, because we didn't talk about identity, but eventually it will go into identity.


We can talk as much as we want about new authentication logics and other things. If you go to developing countries, you go to Southeast Asia in the jungle, or you go to some jungles in Africa, people don't have even a phone. We need to do some authentication even for this folks. ZK will be part of this story. We haven't found the perfect matching. Totally agree. That's why we're still exploring.


I have a feeling that there is convergent evolution at the moment between Web2 and Web3. One day we're going to see better solutions. It's not fully there yet, but I see signal. I don't know if you see it. I personally see signals that were evolving similarly now. They're going to use zero knowledge.


I believe the fact that NIST also pushed the trigger of post-quantum, they need all of the companies -- you know some of the biggest platforms on the card payments, they're switching into quantum as well. I don't know if you know already. Did you hear the rumors?


Anna Rose [59:56] Which ones?


Kostas Kryptos [59:57] Tarun, you know the rumors. I don't want to reveal the --


Tarun Chitra [59:59] Yeah.


Anna Rose [59:58] Visa, MasterCard? You mean those?


Tarun Chitra [01:00:01] Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.


Anna Rose [01:00:02] Are going post-quantum?


Kostas Kryptos [01:00:03] Yes. It's happening.


Tarun Chitra [01:00:04] I mean, I think the NIST standards kind of starting to exist does kind of make the people begrudgingly have to do it.  And they're the first ones historically. Although, I guess, they lost a lot of their best cryptographers. But historically, I feel like Visa and MasterCard were like stockpiling cryptographers.


Kostas Kryptos [01:00:23] I don't know. I personally have seen a shift on what they're focusing on. I don't want to reveal who and what, but at the same time, I was disappointed by the fact that they shifted a few people from crypto crypto research into quantum research. At the same time, they are driven because of regulations.


And if this becomes a rule, and you cannot transact with the government just because NIST say, from now on only quantum-safe algorithms, what do you do if you are such a big institute? You have to switch.


However, for the first time, you see companies, Google did Ligero. I believe, I don't know, Visa, MasterCard, Amex, all of them are going to do something else. We are going to see more zero-knowledge proofs.


Although we discussed about Groth16 and zkAt today, eventually I'm expecting STARKs and Ligero to be pretty much at the top of the equation, just because we have to comply on the zero-knowledge proofs as well. We have to wait 5, 10 years.


But in the next 5, 10 years we're going to find another zkAt which is quantum safe. We are going to find a zkLogin that is quantum safe, ZK Email, zkTLS, everything will be quantum safe. Not because the quantum computer will break it. I don't believe in this story, to tell you the truth. I worked on this topic for many years, even seen quantum computers in my life, but the regulation has to go faster than the hacking activity.


So they will pretty much demand from people to switch. But this opens the door for Web2 companies to do Web3 research. And I believe that Web3 will serve them all of the tools to do Web2.


Anna Rose [01:01:56] Maybe ZK is on a different plane from Web2 and Web3. I think we equate sort of ZK as being in Web3. But when I talk to ZK researchers who've been around for a long time, they're like ZK has been around longer than this word.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:11] No. I disagree. I disagree. I disagree. Even if it was around, the first time that it became --


Tarun Chitra [01:02:15] The demand wasn't there.


Anna Rose [01:02:17] True.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:17] Yes. The demand wasn't there.


Anna Rose [01:02:18] And the research wasn't there.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:20] Exactly. Exactly.


Anna Rose [01:02:20] The performance wasn't there.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:21] And the money that was spent on the blockchain space for hiring the best people -- go see who is working for NSA and NIST, and compare them with the people who are in this room today. Come on. There is a huge difference. There is a huge difference on the quality, and because of this quality, and you will see the same thing will happen with AI. Money will flow into AI, and the AI will evolve by far faster than in the past.


Anna Rose [01:02:44] Yeah. True. True.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:46] And Web3 was unfortunately or fortunately the arena of cryptographers for many years, more than anything else across the world.


Anna Rose [01:02:54] It definitely was the thing that funded it.


Kostas Kryptos [01:02:56] Yes. Exactly.


Anna Rose [01:02:57] The speed of it.


Tarun Chitra [01:02:58] I do think my kind of very abstract view of ZK from the value prop, if you were trying to sell, you had to sell both sides, the crypto side and the non crypto side, or Web3, whatever. Depends on how you want to call it. 


But zero-knowledge proofs without privacy are just an interoperability solution where you can have any virtual machine talk to --  any Turing machine talk to any other Turing machine. That's the most abstract definition.


And then they happen to also have the ability to do that privately. And in some ways that just means that you don't have to think about what system you're using. The value prop to the end user or developer is like, I can maybe, in some future world, especially with people writing less code and AI writing all the code, I don't have to think about translation ever again. And ZK is sort of the universal translator.


And then in some ways, that type of thing is sometimes lost because everyone wants to jump into technical details, and what field am I over, what genus curve am I using, whatever. That's true. But I think if you zoom out, the value prop is this translation thing that people kind of always seem to miss. But that's universal, like that doesn't matter with this --


Kostas Kryptos [01:04:08] A 100% agree with Tarun, by the way. That's the reality. We're part of the story, like cryptographers and everybody who is working on new innovations there, but at the same time, this is the end goal. This is what we're heading to.


Anna Rose [01:04:20] Speaking of these translations, one of the projects that I think you have are called ZK Tunnels.


Kostas Kryptos [01:04:25] Yes.


Anna Rose [01:04:26] Are these like one Turing system talking to another? Are they basically like a bridge kind of thing?


Kostas Kryptos [01:04:33] Exactly. By the way, zkAt is related to ZK Tunnels. Imagine we want to open a channel like Lightning Channel on --


Anna Rose [01:04:39] It's like a channel. Okay. Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [01:04:40] Yes. Imagine the Lightning Channel of Bitcoin. Some people are familiar with Lightning Channel. At the moment, it's only used for payments. You don't do anything.


But what if you wanted to -- in the channel to play poker, or you wanted to play chess, or you wanted to do other things? You need ZK now. Because this logic might be very expensive and it's not easy. I mean, the Lightning Channel, the original version of fraud-proofs on Lightning channel, might work or might not work, because the fraud-proof might be very expensive to verify onchain. So you need to SNARK it.


And sometimes you want the fact that someone is buying something from a grocery store or playing poker, you don't want this to be visible onchain.


Anna Rose [01:05:17] Public.


Kostas Kryptos [01:05:18] Yes. zkAt. Welcome to zkAt. But now, zkAt, when we're opening a channel and we're playing chess, we are creating the ceremony together, we're running the ceremony together, and nobody else apart from the two of us know what we're doing on the channel.


So that's why I told you at the very beginning, even if we're talking about authentication for zkAt, it's not --


Anna Rose [01:05:38] You can use it for the ZK Tunnel. Got it.


Kostas Kryptos [01:05:39] Yes. For ZK Tunnel --


Anna Rose [01:05:41] You're kind of connecting.


Kostas Kryptos [01:05:41] It's also usable because you are still hiding the logic. The only difference is now you're not the only person who is running the ceremony in your head, you are two people now. Because both of you have an incentive to hide your activity, or even how the amount is happening.


And then, if you want to also have audits, you add the viewing key on this, and then the regulator can come and see if you're doing something illegal.


Anna Rose [01:06:04] Nice.


Kostas Kryptos [01:06:05] So ZK Tunnels is another application of zkAt.


Anna Rose [01:06:09] Very nice. I didn't actually know that. I thought it was sort of a standalone. But it makes sense.


Going back to this conversation about how it not only acts as a technical bridge, but also could be bridging previous web data onchain, or just proving things about web data, the fact that ZK could be used by more traditional business as well as new business. What about when it comes to governments? You talked about some credit card companies, you talked about regulation, but could governments themselves start using ZK, or are you seeing that?


Kostas Kryptos [01:06:39] Well, with Sui, it's happening already, as you know, because very recently we had the announcement of the Greek stock market that said, okay, everything that is happening in the previous world where we had the full control, everything was running in our systems, we need to have access to the blockchain. Why? Do you know why, by the way, a stock market wants to go to the crypto space?


Anna Rose [01:06:59] No.


Kostas Kryptos [01:07:00] Can you imagine? Can you imagine? Tarun, can you imagine why --


Tarun Chitra [01:07:03] Yes. Tons of reasons.


Anna Rose [01:07:03] They want 24 hours a day?


Tarun Chitra [01:07:04] Tons of reasons.


Kostas Kryptos [01:07:05] Give me one reason. Give me one reason.


Tarun Chitra [01:07:07] There's a lot of very annoying structured products that are too expensive to make in traditional finance and are only enforced by legal contract that you could do much more easily. Like why do I need to pay a broker to hold a straddle for me. That should be done automatically.


And I think that's the dream of all these tokenized stock companies right now, and is that, hey, DeFi people have figured out how to do all these structured products things that historically you needed banks to do. And once you have the tokenized stock, you can do all that. And you're kind of seeing that stuff happening right now.


Anna Rose [01:07:39] Interesting.


Tarun Chitra [01:07:40] Unfortunately, that's the other thing that's like I haven't been much in ZK. It's like I've been doing this type of stuff.


Kostas Kryptos [01:07:46] Exactly. It's 100% true. And I will give you another two reasons why this happened, and why I personally had to meet the leadership team of the Greek stock market. And they explained to me the reasons. One is this.


The other is, when many things were not very automated at the very -- at the past, and you are moving to a new technology in 2025, in their head, the broader database in the world, and the most compatible with many other systems in the world, it is the blockchain.


They cannot use, again, a centralized version because they want to also interact with people that are not -- like they're crypto users. They are already doing DeFi, they know what is trading, and they want to come into their systems as well, because now you're using the database.


I mean, imagine the public ledger of the blockchain. This particular feature didn't exist before. We didn't have public databases in the past that were accessible by multiple platforms, even if it wasn't your own products.


So the Greek stock market might go onchain, and then the Serbian stock market will go onchain, and then the UK stock market will go onchain. But you can reuse the users between the three. How do you do that in this world? This was one thing.


What Tarun mentioned, obviously, complexity of creating new products, or even the products that they have, sometimes it's very complex to do it. There is a third element that I was not prepared for this when I heard about it. And you know what is it? It's Revolut.


Anna Rose [01:09:08] Revolut.


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:09] Do you know Revolut, the company, the Revolut and Venmo and all of these -- WeChat and all of these things? What do you think is happening now? The new generation, people that are 18, 22, for the first time in --


Anna Rose [01:09:20] They're only using that.


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:22] In their time, for the first time, they have a single click and they can buy Apple, Google, Facebook stock now. Do you know what it takes to buy a Greek stock?


Anna Rose [01:09:31] I don't know. But, is it --


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:32] You need to be registered. You need to be registered. You need to use an [?]


Anna Rose [01:09:34] They're trying to be in the world, kind of like they feel like they're sort of --


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:37] No. No. No. They will close them down. Revolut will probably result to default on some countries because the local economy cannot sell. If you are 20 years old --


Anna Rose [01:09:47] You're not going on that.


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:48] Would you buy a Greek stock or Apple?


Anna Rose [01:09:50] Wow.


Kostas Kryptos [01:09:50] You will buy Apple, because Apple is a single click and Apple is American. And you don't want to buy a Greek stock. Why should you buy a Greek stock?


So the only way for all of the local stock markets from small economies in this globalized world --


Anna Rose [01:10:05] Is to go onchain.


Kostas Kryptos [01:10:05] You go onchain. You want the Mexican, you want the Korean, you want the -- I don't know, the British to be able to buy a Greek stock with a single click.


Anna Rose [01:10:14] I mean, some of the bigger ones are, like the UK and Germany. You can -- those are easy-ish to access. You can get them through apps. But it's true, the Greek, I wouldn't know where to --


Kostas Kryptos [01:10:26] So small countries are in a big trouble because these -- I can go to DAX, the German index, and probably, I can find a way to buy [?].


Anna Rose [01:10:35] You can find an app that would let you buy it, actually. You might have to be in Germany or something, but yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [01:10:40] But you see, even this -- imagine even them, they need to go to the blockchain. Because there is another particular element of the crypto user. The crypto user is a typical spender user who is trying different things. It's the good audience for them.


And there are also cycles on crypto. You're going from bull market to bear market and so on. What do you do on the bear market? Obviously, you have to -- if you sell crypto, you have to buy something. And then you buy more stable stuff.


Anna Rose [01:11:06] Stable things.


Kostas Kryptos [01:11:07] Yes. And this is stable token, this is -- I don't know, tokenized gold, this is probably real estate, but it's also stocks. So if we see it from the perspective of someone who is running a stock market, a nation's stock market, you need to think about survival as well in the next few years.


Anna Rose [01:11:25] That's interesting. So tell me what your conversations gave you, and do they need ZK tech somehow?


Kostas Kryptos [01:11:29] Exactly. Exactly. Look, Kostas, do whatever you want, but don't reveal all of the prices and everything onchain because at least the worst thing that will happen to us is some of the institutional investors, their balances and everything is visible on the blockchain, because we know blockchain is public, but at the same time it's sacrificing some of the privacy we used to have before. Centralized, yes, but there was privacy against other people.


So we created a custom circuit to do all of the auctions when a company goes IPO to hide all of the balances in the -- we have the confidential amounts, all of this confidential transactions, and all of this stuff. So we created the ZK stack that focuses on getting a stock market into the blockchain.


And they came to me because the options were two. Let's use trusted execution environments, SGX or cloud services. But there are wars happening. Many things are happening. You don't want to go centralized.


The only technology at the moment that is not centralized is based on math, and you don't have any dependencies, it's ZK. So the only way to escape was using a custom circuit. We worked with many cryptographers, even with them, to go to their systems, see what are the flows, what do we need to hide, what identities we need to hide.


And we have proofs of solvency as well that are also using zero-knowledge proofs, the newest ones, and they decided to pick zero knowledge. And one day, the COO of the stock market came to me and say, we would never believe that this is possible cryptographically, but now you gave us a dream. You gave us a new thing to consider, and we built it on ZK.


Anna Rose [01:13:04] It will create very different dynamics though, if it's private. The fact that wallets are public in DeFi, it's kind of a feature, not a bug. Right?


Kostas Kryptos [01:13:14] Not necessarily. For us. But if you are an institutional investor, and you are taking a position to buy many millions of dollars in stocks, you are revealing your financial status, and probably some other can do an MEV on you, because they know you put all of the money on Apple, so you might not have money to compete with me on HSBC.


So there are MEV. I mean, we're talking about investors and we're talking about other people, and there are societies -- I'm telling you about a particular thing I realized.


I had a discussion about Egypt, like Cairo. And there are some cultural things there where when you are donating money, the person who is receiving the donation, they shouldn't know your balance. Because it's considered a harassment. It's not considered good. So in some situations, we have to think about it.


Anna Rose [01:13:59]: Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [01:13:59] Yes. It has to be regulated, audited with a viewing key with something, but you need some privacy. Eventually, I believe there will be selective privacy in the future for all of the blockchain transactions.


Anna Rose [01:14:09] How far along is the Greek project? The Greek stock market?


Kostas Kryptos [01:14:12] We already passed the second phase, and now we're working on the POC. It's happening. We're having --


Anna Rose [01:14:17] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [01:14:18] Yes.


Anna Rose [01:14:18] Which ZK system do they feel safe with? And which blockchain are they going to be on? I'm assuming Sui, but --


Kostas Kryptos [01:14:24] Well, they will be on Sui, of course.


Anna Rose [01:14:26] Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [01:14:28] We're using -- because the circuit is quite complicated, we're using in this, like Rust, we convert -- I'm not mentioning the company, but we're converting Rust into circuits. And then, from the circuit, you are going into a Groth16 folding, and this is what is verified on Sui.


Anna Rose [01:14:41] But is it then going to be also be made post-quantum somehow?


Kostas Kryptos [01:14:44] Yes. In the future, it's going to be post-quantum.


Anna Rose [01:14:47] Okay. Interesting. Tarun, I'm really curious what you make of bringing a stock market onchain with ZK?


Tarun Chitra [01:14:55] I guess I see the centralized side of this a lot right now where people are issuing stocks onchain, but that already exist in kind of like stablecoins.


Anna Rose [01:15:08] Like other way.


Tarun Chitra [01:15:08] There's kind of the second boom of real-world assets right now. It's kind of gone from 2 billion to 20 billion over the last year. But I would say at least, and this is a US-centric view of this, I think they get pitched a lot by ZK companies and ZK tools, but none of them seem to go care. At the end of the day, I think whoever has the most regulatory licensed stuff ends up winning in this type of market.


Kostas Kryptos [01:15:34] This is true, but --


Tarun Chitra [01:15:35] I agree. For frontier markets, that's not true.


Anna Rose [01:15:37] Yeah. There is frontier markets.


Tarun Chitra [01:15:37] I'm giving the -- frontier markets, that might not be true. For the US though, it's like I've seen how hard it has been for ZK companies and cryptography companies to break in, versus someone who has an FCM license.


Anna Rose [01:15:52] Yeah. It sounds almost like it's these -- but I like how you call them the frontier networks or frontier markets where it's the Apples and those stocks, they are already integrated into the Revolut, because it's what people want. And so those centralized stock markets, they're not going to be motivated to try anything else for now.


Kostas Kryptos [01:16:11] The US doesn't have the survival problem. All of the other markets do have a survival problem. If you open the market to American stocks, to any society in the world, most of the people will buy American stocks. We have to accept it.


Anna Rose [01:16:22] For now.


Kostas Kryptos [01:16:23] Yeah. For now at least. But that's the reality, because this is the companies they're interacting with in their everyday life. They're interacting with Apple, Google, Facebook, Netflix, Tesla -- Tesla is not, but --


Anna Rose [01:16:33] Familiar.


Kostas Kryptos [01:16:34] Yes. They're familiar with these companies, and this is what someone will buy at their 18 and 20. We have a new generation. The new generation is exposed to the things --


Anna Rose [01:16:42] I don't know. When I think of the Greek stock market, I'm assuming there's a lot of shipping companies.


Kostas Kryptos [01:16:48] There are shipping companies. There are banking. There is very small tech. But you're right. I mean, they will die off if we don't do something to bring fresh blood into the system.


Tarun Chitra [01:16:57] One thing though that is sort of confounding here is that frontier markets tend to have heavy private concentration in their stock markets where they have a bunch of public-listed companies where it's like 5% of the float is liquid, 80% is owned by a family, and then 15 is sort of some investors along the way.


And this shipping is the greatest example of that, where it's like all inside ownership. There's not really -- there's no ETFs buying. There's no investment funds buying.


So I think there's also that aspect that means there won't be that much volume anyway. Who is actually -- there's not like for a retirement fund trying to buy these stocks because there's not that much available for sell.


Anna Rose [01:17:34] Although could companies there start to create businesses that are more friendly to it?


Tarun Chitra [01:17:38] Yeah. Yeah. New businesses, maybe. But existing businesses, I kind of think is -- and so that's where there's this chicken and the egg problem of like, the existing businesses actually have zero incentive for a more liquid stock market. They prefer the lack of transparency or trading, because it means that they can borrow more against their holdings. No. No. I'm just -- I'm being blunt as to kind of the truth.


Kostas Kryptos [01:17:56] This is true. This is true. And these were actually discussions we had internally. But there was another point and probably like Tarun, you are familiar with this. Everybody, because I didn't connect this with the real estate market, everybody wants these illiquid assets to go into the agentic world.


Some of these are now happening with users, or centralized systems where you don't have many flexibilities even on the agents you want to run. If you go to crypto for the first time, you can define an agent that actually buys a Greek stock. And because they're doing arbitrage and other things, you can even make money, or the company itself might allow for crypto flow.


Imagine someone buying with Bitcoin stock now. You might bring new liquidity to the system. It's happening. I mean, we're millions now. Degens are not just a small audience anymore. It's more than this. I feel proud about it. I was one of the first being in the space since the very, very beginning, 2009, and I sense it. Now we're millions. Back then, we were 20 people.


Anna Rose [01:19:01] Yeah. Long time.


Kostas Kryptos [01:19:02] So it's a market, and coming from Facebook, companies are looking to -- because the Greek stock market is also a private company. It is government partially owned. It's not just government. They want -- everybody wants the crypto users these days. I believe we're having a big power and --


Anna Rose [01:19:22] Interesting.


Kostas Kryptos [01:19:23] We have to use it properly.


Tarun Chitra [01:19:24] I guess I see the other side of this where I'm like, it just kind of looks like banks are going to win again.


Anna Rose [01:19:30] Really, Tarun?


Tarun Chitra [01:19:30] At least in the big countries, it feels a little bit like that. So I think it's interesting to see the dialectic here.


Anna Rose [01:19:40]  The frontier side.


Kostas Kryptos [01:19:41] Yeah. Yeah.


Tarun Chitra [01:19:42] Because yeah, it's just kind of like in the US and actually even Europe, I kind of feel -- and like Germany, UK and stuff, I feel like the regulation actually disincentivizes the big players more. It has not really help small ones at all.


Anna Rose [01:19:54] Makes it impossible for the small ones.


Tarun Chitra [01:19:56] So I don't know. I'm sorry for being cynical. I should have more optimism.


Kostas Kryptos [01:20:02] It's fine. It's fine. It's fine. We want this --


Anna Rose [01:20:04] ZK still has a golden future from what we've heard today.


Tarun Chitra [01:20:07] I think ZK has a future beyond crypto, clearly.


Anna Rose [01:20:10] Exactly.


Tarun Chitra [01:20:11] The fact that everyone wants -- I'm not sure it's monetizable, but that's fine. It's a good public --


Anna Rose [01:20:15] I also agree.


Tarun Chitra [01:20:17] I think it clearly has a bright future. I just am not sure that the stocks on the blockchain thing won't just be like three companies that control the KYC process for the market makers. So then it's effectively centralized.


Anna Rose [01:20:31] Huh.


Tarun Chitra [01:20:33] Again, maybe it's cynical because of like, in the US, I feel like you see that happening pretty aggressively right now.


Anna Rose [01:20:39] It does almost seem though that the innovation may just not happen there. Maybe that's what happens. It sort of has to flow out. It goes to these like edges, the places where there is no big central player, and the banks aren't as powerful.


Tarun Chitra [01:20:51] I mean, it is still a form of regulatory arbitrage because a blockchain Greek stock, if there's a non Greek buyer, realistically, the reason for that is you found some weird way to emulate a Greek buyer who registered and this is whatever maps to whatever Greek KYC is for trading. But you're able to get them to avoid doing it fully, because you're able to sell it to them onchain.


Kostas Kryptos [01:21:14] I think there will be KYC that you're going to get an NFT where you are allowed to trade the Greek stocks. That's the whole idea here.


Tarun Chitra [01:21:21] So, but the weird thing though is you're talking about Revolut. If I'm a Revolut user in the UK and I buy a Greek stock, the Greek KYC and the London KYC are not the same. And there's not really interoperability.


Kostas Kryptos [01:21:33] Oh, you cannot buy a Greek stock in Revolut, though. That's the thing.


Tarun Chitra [01:21:36] Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.


Kostas Kryptos [01:21:37] It would be nice if you could, but you cannot.


Tarun Chitra [01:21:37] But my point is someone will make a synthetic if it's onchain, and then people will arb this. That's what always happens. And so, it ends up being reg arb, fundamentally. It's just that no one wants to say that, but it is really oftentimes that.


Anna Rose [01:21:53]: It'll just be a different type.


Tarun Chitra [01:21:55] Yeah. It's basically like KYC not being interoperable, you're creating this arbitrage for people who want to -- who own both KYCs to trade with each other.


Anna Rose [01:22:04] Interesting.


Tarun Chitra [01:22:05] Sorry. Yeah.


Anna Rose [01:22:07] Crazy. We've gone more into global trade stock market conversation here. But Kostas, I do want to say a big thank you for sharing so much about the ZK work that's happening in Sui. Anything that should be on our radar that's coming up soon.


Kostas Kryptos [01:22:23] If you check my tweets, probably every two months you're going to see a new algorithm from ZK coming from us. That's interesting. I cannot reveal everything at the moment, but there are some very good things that people are working on.


Anna Rose [01:22:35] Are you doing things in the Ligero track, like using some of those techniques?


Kostas Kryptos [01:22:39] We're doing many things. We're even trying to compress some of the existing schemes, by the way.


Anna Rose [01:22:45] Ah, nice.


Tarun Chitra [01:22:47] It is funny that everyone is going off on this Ligero trend.


Anna Rose [01:22:51] Yeah. Ligero's very, very exciting at the moment. A lot of people have --


Tarun Chitra [01:22:54] No. No. It's just kind of funny because it's like, I think this is the first time I've seen the thing that you often see in machine learning or AI, where some technique that didn't get cited for 10 years suddenly comes back and then --


Kostas Kryptos [01:23:07] Exactly.


Tarun Chitra [01:23:08] I gets like a million things.


Anna Rose [01:23:10] 100%.


Tarun Chitra [01:23:10] In ZK, I feel like it's always been like the front runner thing has existed, and then it kind of got usurped by something, and the ones in the back don't ever come back to the front. But this feels like somehow --


Anna Rose [01:23:23] I don't think it ever had its moment. Like when it was invented in 2017.


Tarun Chitra [01:23:26] Yeah. Yeah. I guess it's true. Maybe it was a little early also. But that's what I'm saying, that it is kind of the science or AI thing where that happens, whereas in cryptography, I've found that to happen a lot less. So, I don't know, just like a meta observation.


Anna Rose [01:23:40] Nice. All right. Kostas, thank you so much for being on. Always fun to hear your excitement and all of these ideas that you have going on around ZK.


Kostas Kryptos [01:23:50] Likewise. Thank you so much. Tarun, thanks for the good questions. You will see some updates on the zkAt paper based on your feedback.


Tarun Chitra [01:23:56] Great. No. Hey. Look, look, look.


Anna Rose [01:23:58] Very cool.


Tarun Chitra [01:23:58] I only exist to ask these dumb questions. There's not much --


Kostas Kryptos [01:24:03] We will make an acknowledgement. Don't worry.


Anna Rose [01:24:06] Nice.


Kostas Kryptos [01:24:07] Thank you so much.


Anna Rose [01:24:08] All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Kai. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.
[a]I hear "Top" but not sure