[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 3:03)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online. This week, I speak with Soubhik Deb, head of research at Eigenlabs.


We explore their new project Yukon, a platform for open collaborative auto research competitions. We cover the origins of the project, with the initial development of ecdsa.fail, launched in May of this year, as a challenge to match Google's undisclosed quantum circuit for breaking elliptic curve cryptography. The result of ecdsa.fail exceeded everyone's expectations, and so Yukon as a platform was born. Since then, the platform has grown to host competitions like snark.fast, better.codes, and the Heesch problem. Shabak shares how these competitions are framed around well-posed questions, where the breakthroughs have come from, and the vision for Yukon as an AI-native scientific institution. This is an episode that follows a bit on our recent interviews with Ron Rothblum and Benedikt Buntz, as well as the Lean Ethereum series we did earlier this year.


I'm very excited about this one, since this is part of a larger story that we're seeing emerge from the ZK community. That is the acceleration of cryptography research and engineering, which is unlike anything we've ever seen before. We have many more episodes in the pipeline focused on this topic, so keep an eye out for those.


Now, Tanya will share a little bit about this week's sponsor. Today's episode is sponsored by Sovright. Sovright builds the critical infrastructure that preserves your right to choose.


Sovright has built two products, Argos and the Sovright Mining Pool. Argos is a free tool that lets anyone with ZEC stranded in an old, unmaintained wallet client recover their funds. Enter your seed phrase, generate a new address, and your money is yours again.


No fees, no complexity. The Sovright Mining Pool is Zcash native and built on Stratum V2, where miners choose their own transactions. Every block carries a verifiable signed attestation, and payouts arrive in fully shielded ZEC.


Two essential problems that have been overlooked, finally solved. Discover more at Sovright.com. So thanks again, Sovright.


And now, here's our episode. Today I'm here with Soubhik Deb, Head of Research at Eigen Labs. Welcome to the show, Soubhik.


Thanks Anna for having me on the show. Today, I think we're going to be spending a lot of time talking about the platform project called Yukon. But first, why don't we find out a little bit about you?


What were you working on before? What have you been working on at Eigen Labs? Like were you part of the Eigen layer launch and all of that?


Tell me a bit about you.


[Soubhik Deb] (3:04 - 4:05)
So my background is originally in information theory, communication systems, signal processing, and I did a lot of work on 5G telecommunication industry. And I did my PhD under Sriram at University of Washington, Seattle, and my PhD was on blockchains. I worked on peer-to-peer networking, fair ordering of transaction consensus protocols, and Eigen layer, and an Eigen DA.


And I have been with Eigen Labs since day one. Some of the Eigen token intersubjective white paper and all this thing, I wrote it if you know, like in collaboration with Sriram, Gautam, and a few other people. So if you know whom to blame for coming up intersubjectivity, yeah.


And we did a lot of work on this, the Eigen layer, Eigen DA, and ADSS in the past. And now we are working on some new cool projects that we'll be talking in the show today.


[Anna Rose] (4:06 - 4:50)
Very cool. Yeah, quick disclosure, we were quite an early investor, part of ZKV, we were early investors in Eigen Labs, and it was cool to see all the progress on that front. Now today I feel like we're going to be switching gear though, because Yukon is quite a different project.


I want to understand a little bit where it comes from. There's a few websites that I've been seeing floating around, like ecdsa.fail or snark.fast, that I found out kind of after the fact was part of like coming from you guys. I knew about it more from the domain-specific side, and not that there was a platform underneath that was helping to like put together these projects or these competitions.


But let's go back to the start of this project. What is the kickoff point of Yukon?


[Soubhik Deb] (4:50 - 5:08)
So it all started from March when Google published their paper on coming up with a quantum circuit that is far more resource efficient than the previous state-of-the-art quantum circuit in breaking SecP256 elliptic curve that is primarily used for public key cryptography of Bitcoin and Ethereum.


[Anna Rose] (5:09 - 5:13)
This is the like they made steps towards Shor's algorithm working. Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (5:13 - 5:21)
And the implications are that if you find a much more efficient this quantum circuit, the Q-Day becomes much closer and closer.


[Anna Rose] (5:21 - 5:27)
And Q-Day is this day that quantum computers could like break cryptography, right? Bitcoin specifically.


[Soubhik Deb] (5:28 - 5:37)
Bitcoin. The coins of Satoshi Nakamoto can be moved, which has not moved in years. Yeah.


So that is the implications. It will break all of internet cryptography.


[Anna Rose] (5:37 - 5:46)
Yes. But what Google published was not that that had been solved, just that there was an incremental improvement that they had discovered, but they didn't actually reveal it.


[Soubhik Deb] (5:47 - 6:02)
Yes. And there were a lot of stories why they didn't reveal it, but they used it as video knowledge proof to prove that they own, they have such a circuit with certain this kind of resource efficiency that they own. Nothing more than that.


So cool.


[Anna Rose] (6:02 - 6:17)
We talked about this a lot on the show. We were so excited that they had this like they'd use ZKPs in this amazingly innovative way. But it did like on the quantum front, I think people were left quite unsatisfied because they weren't actually given the results or that they weren't shown how it was achieved.


[Soubhik Deb] (6:18 - 6:37)
And the downside of that is that if you want to defend against Q-Day, you should know what circuits that are coming, how to robustify the system against that, what are the defensive mechanisms, right? And if you don't have insights towards that, it is bad, like you are not prepared for Q-Day. So that is the big implication of like not revealing quantum circuits.


[Anna Rose] (6:38 - 6:46)
Okay. So that happened. But what prompted you to run any sort of competition around it?


Because you're not a quantum computer company, as far as I know.


[Soubhik Deb] (6:47 - 7:32)
Yeah. So at the same time frame, what happened is that the auto research, a concept called auto research, where you use your agents to just optimise on a given problem statement with a verifier and the agents keep running it by itself and just keep optimising it. It became kind of popular.


It catched public imagination. And we thought that, ah, so it was just a spark that one of our teammates, Gautam, got is that maybe we can use auto research to end the use the zero-knowledge prover that Google's team is using, which they made it public, the zero-knowledge prover. Or the verifier.


The prover also. Oh, the prover as well. The prover also.


And you use that to take a crack into, to take a crack into the problem.


[Anna Rose] (7:32 - 7:37)
That's the start of Yukon, but Yukon didn't really exist then, right? Like how did you first launch this?


[Soubhik Deb] (7:37 - 7:55)
So we launched a competition called ecdsa.fail to come up with a circuit that, the goal was to come up with a circuit that is as resource efficient as the one that Google came up with, but it will be all in the open and public. And that's what kick-started the whole.


[Anna Rose] (7:55 - 8:29)
Very nice. I want to go back to that May when you first launched this project. Do you launch the ecdsa.fail website right then?


Yes. So that was sort of the first project. And I had heard of that, but I, again, I didn't, I actually don't know if I knew it was eigen layer related.


Like it was just sort of something floating around. So ecdsa.fail, a website where people could, like, this is what I didn't quite understand about this. Is it a platform where people could submit their answers?


Are they tapping, like, what are they locking into so that they can actually use this verifier?


[Soubhik Deb] (8:29 - 9:33)
Yep. So what happens is that we are in our backend, we are running this verifier. Basically, it's a verifier that the Google SP1, Google used SP1, so it's SP1 prover for that.


That's basically the verifier. And we are running that in the backend. Now, if you go to the website, you will find how to participate.


We wrote this CLI. You use that CLI to get your agent to start reading through the details of the competition. Second, how to pull up the past submission.


Suppose you submitted a circuit. I can, with my CLI, if I put it, my agent, I can access your submissions also, what circuit, and I can start building on top of your submissions. It's very different from how competition.


It's a chain. This is how research works, right? You build on each other's.


So this is the meta thing is it's a research at agent speed, machine speed. You build on top of each other. This is how research works.


It's not like an IMO, an Olympiad competition where everyone submits independently. Wow.


[Anna Rose] (9:33 - 9:45)
See, I totally thought it was. I thought it was PVP. I thought it was like everyone is on their local machine doing everything and then submitting and then competing.


But you're saying it isn't.


[Soubhik Deb] (9:45 - 9:45)
It isn't.


[Anna Rose] (9:45 - 9:52)
So it's like over time, someone does a leap and then everyone will grab that and continue to work on it.


[Soubhik Deb] (9:52 - 10:13)
Yeah. And this leads to a huge amplification of growth because I don't have to discover it independently, the whole thing. And this is what we want.


This was a thesis when we launched. We wanted to see if it's true. And now we know it's true.


This multiplayer auto research framework, it works.


[Anna Rose] (10:14 - 10:19)
That's so cool. Okay. Going back to my question, though, what was the improvement over Google's result?


[Soubhik Deb] (10:19 - 10:29)
Right now, at this point in time, it is 2.6 times better than Google's result in terms of the product of qubits and Toffoli. So cool.


[Anna Rose] (10:29 - 10:49)
And I want to ask, how did this come about? So I sort of picture if you're building on previous research, there's probably these like step changes, like when the French paper came out, all of a sudden, everyone's like the speed leaped up. Yes.


And it was like before you were 1.5 percent or sorry, you were 1.5 times slower or less good.


[Soubhik Deb] (10:49 - 10:49)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (10:50 - 11:03)
And then all of a sudden, it's like, okay, we're at parity with the Google result, then we're going further. What were the big breakthroughs? So like one was this, like figuring out the method that Google used.


Were there other sort of big step changes?


[Soubhik Deb] (11:03 - 11:52)
Yep. So there were, in my mind, there were three big breakthroughs, I think, that came up. The first one was making it external.


It helped people who were, this was even before the French paper came, the mining of French paper that happened. All these people who are experts in building their agent harness, the persona, they were able to attack this problem because they have much better. In fact, one of our team members who was not participating in it when we were doing internal testing, the one day before we did internal testing, he spent like $5,000 in codex subscriptions and made huge leaps that our lead engineer was not able to figure out.


Like it's just out of nowhere. And then we made it external, there were a lot more people who are much more sophisticated in their harnesses. They made a lot of leaps.


[Anna Rose] (11:52 - 11:56)
So step one, make it external, let it step out of your company.


[Soubhik Deb] (11:56 - 12:40)
Yes. Step two, this mining of this paper, especially the French paper, that was very important. They mined the French paper and then they did a lot of hill grinding and all this hill climbing on that.


And it just went beyond the Google's paper within two weeks. Now after that, for two months, there was like, if you go to the chart, you'll see that for two months, that is almost a plateau. It was flat.


Okay. Then something happened in middle August. Okay.


Yeah. So in middle of the August, someone, one of the auto researchers, his name is Teddy, he's from Starquare, he went back to the starting of the whole competition and he kind of summarised all the tricks, but he summarised like a bunch of hills and all this thing, what hills they have been.


[Anna Rose] (12:41 - 12:42)
It's like a survey of knowledge.


[Soubhik Deb] (12:42 - 12:53)
Survey of knowledge. Okay. He did that.


But then he started from this beginning and he started building, like getting his agent to explore. Like he's not building on other people's ideas.


[Anna Rose] (12:53 - 13:02)
Ah, he went back and said, here's everything we tried, but now fresh start. Don't get confused by what already exists, but now you know all these techniques.


[Soubhik Deb] (13:03 - 13:14)
Wow. And somehow he came up with a technique called GCD ping-pong. Can you say that again?


Yeah. GCD ping-pong. GCD ping-pong.


[Anna Rose] (13:14 - 13:20)
Yeah. Okay. And some kind of ping-ponging is happening.


What is GCD? Is this like a known thing?


[Soubhik Deb] (13:20 - 13:23)
It's some kind of trick within the quantum circuit.


[Anna Rose] (13:23 - 13:27)
It's some paper. It's a reference to some, it's like the KZG of quantum or something.


[Soubhik Deb] (13:27 - 14:22)
Yeah. Something. Got it.


And before his technique, the Platy was stuck at, so current circuit is for leaderboard is 49% better than Google's classified circuit. That's why it was stuck for almost two months. He made that submission and suddenly to improve up to 57% better than Google's submission.


And then people built on top of his submissions, it now going beyond 60%. This improvement that was done by Teddy, it's an illustration of like, you keep the competition open, you let all the past submissions be open, be retrievable by anyone. And they can, like, you don't know when something that has failed before can be used.


These are failed ideas. You can access the failed ideas also, not just the successful submission, failed submissions. Sometimes what happens in research is that something failed because something else was missing, but then later on some successful trick came, you combine them, you make huge improvements.


[Anna Rose] (14:22 - 14:22)
For sure.


[Soubhik Deb] (14:23 - 14:39)
So it happens all the time in research. And that is what we're trying to replicate in this, like, our whole Yukon. And this is what happened.


This was an illustration of that, that Teddy was able to access the past submission, the past starting point and, like, make this huge leap.


[Anna Rose] (14:39 - 14:47)
Nice. What was the name of the person again? It's Zaddy?


[Soubhik Deb]
Teddy. He's from Starkware.


[Anna Rose] 
Oh, Teddy.


[Soubhik Deb] (14:48 - 14:50)
Yeah. @franklyteddy, that's his Twitter handle. 


[Anna Rose] (14:51 - 15:07)
Okay. Nice. So this is the start. So everything you're describing is this ecdsa.fail. It was an experiment. One thing I wondered, how are the winners, quote unquote, being rewarded if it's an ongoing research project that, like, never really ends?


[Soubhik Deb] (15:08 - 16:01)
Yeah. So that comes into the whole platform, how we are doing this. So right now, if you go to Yukon, there are a lot of competitions.


What we do is we give a weekly, like, we have this $10,000 earmark weekly where we give people to the active competitions, who are actively participating, proportional to the outcomes, improvements they are making. I see. And each competition has a weight.


On top of that, each competition can have their own sponsors. This is something, for example, we did one competition with Leiter, where they sponsored that also. So they sponsored some amount as a prize money for improvement, because they have their own problem statement they're coming up with, and they want improvement.


So they put sponsorship money, which if you are participating and you are in the leaderboard, based on your contribution, you get something, which is on top of the weekly reward, platform-wide weekly rewards that we have.


[Anna Rose] (16:01 - 16:05)
But on the initial ecdsa.fail site, what was your cadence?


[Soubhik Deb] (16:05 - 16:12)
Was it weekly? Yeah. At the beginning, there was no rewards.


People were just participating out of their enthusiasm, sheer enthusiasm.


[Anna Rose] (16:12 - 16:18)
They are burning so many tokens for this. Was it partly just the challenge?


[Soubhik Deb] (16:18 - 16:46)
Because Google had been like, you can't know. Yeah, there are two things. One is that one, like beating a Goliath.


All this, like collection of thousands, hundreds of daily Goliath. The Goliath. Yeah.


The second one is, it is a very fascinating problem because it impacts the Q-day, how soon the Q-day is coming. So people got really fascinated that, okay, let's do this, like we want to see how close we can get to that.


[Anna Rose] (16:46 - 16:54)
That's so cool. So the ecdsa is like, had no prize money. It was just sort of for the lulz, for the, to win the competition.


[Soubhik Deb] (16:54 - 16:55)
The laurels.


[Anna Rose] (16:55 - 16:55)
Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (16:55 - 17:26)
And, and one thing I'll say that there was, it led to a very good community. Yeah, I bet. Justin has played a significant role in the initial days, co-hiring, bringing all the people and then suddenly there were so many fascinating, interesting, but they are all talking with each other.


It's like a real research collaborative. If you go to the Telegram channel, we can share that as part of this episode. People are just discussing with each other, hey, we'll break these qubits today, this much.


[Anna Rose] (17:28 - 17:42)
So cool. Just going back to this May sort of period, at what point in the ecdsa.phil experiment did you decide, you know what, there's more than just this particular competition. We should make this into a platform.


When did that happen?


[Soubhik Deb] (17:42 - 18:15)
So first we, we thought, okay, we should do more competitions. Not platform. We want to see that.


Can we replicate this thesis, that multiplayer auto-research where it's people are collaborating with each other. Can, is it truly a pattern that is people are enthusiastic about, or is just a one-time thing where, because the problem statement was so fascinating, people came. So we wanted to check that.


So right after this, within two weeks period, mid June, this thing happened. We came across a Succinct's paper, Succinct/Espresso. So they had that paper, Flock, exactly.


[Anna Rose] (18:16 - 18:20)
We actually had Benedict and recently Ron on to talk a little bit about Flock.


[Soubhik Deb] (18:20 - 18:53)
And the one thing, I think it was late June when they published that, somewhere around June period. And, and, and one of the things that they were doing was optimising this Flock on Mac books, on Apple Silicon. And, and we had experience, already an experience with Apple Silicon because of our other project called Dog Bloom.


And so we thought, okay, so this is the metric that they are targeting is how many hash compressions they can do on Blake 3 per second. That's, that's the, that's the major metric they are targeting.


[Anna Rose] (18:54 - 18:56)
And again, there's this verifier, I guess.


[Soubhik Deb] (18:56 - 18:57)
Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (18:57 - 18:57)
Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (18:57 - 19:30)
Nice. So we reach out to Succinct's team and Succinct's team has been really helpful. Tamir especially was the, was, was chatting with us to build, like he wrote, I believe he was a lead writer for the Flock, Flock's implementation.


And he put us in touch with the rest of the team, Ron and others. And we did this, yes, Benedikt. And then we did the SNARK.fast on Apple Silicon, which surprisingly led to like more than 3x improvement.


[Anna Rose] (19:30 - 19:35)
But did it also lead to some other competitions? Because you found out there are other parts that needed to be optimised.


[Soubhik Deb] (19:36 - 21:12)
It led to like a succession, like we did a version of the SNARK.fast, which is about x86 on S and the regular architecture besides MacBook, all of them use x86. So we did a version on that, which is, I think it recently wrapped up, I think. So that was the other competition we did.


And one thing that in that same time period that happened, that helped us in conducting Snark.fast on Apple Silicon and some other competitions on Apple Silicon is that we invested time in building good sandboxes for Macs. So people talk all about these sandboxes, but they are all for, none of them are for Apple. Interesting.


At that time period, right now there is some projects coming up, but it's not, it was not available. So we internally wrote sandbox. It was, we wrote that sandbox for a different competition, which was about inference optimisation for MLX, which we partnered with Poolsight, which, which had the most, the best Western model at that point in time, the Laguna model series.


And we put a lot of investment in engineering effort in writing a good sandbox, which is stable enough because you need to run the verifier in the same hardware so that you do proper validation. And we, once we wrote that sandbox for MLX, we reused it across other competitions where a different competition is happening, but on the Apple Silicon. So it became our core infrastructure.


[Anna Rose] (21:13 - 22:18)
Oh man, there's so much I want to uncover here. I don't even know where to go. Like, okay, let's go back to Snark.fast. I want to understand when you talk about it being on a specific hardware, it's using a frontier model. It has a harness of some kind on a laptop, on a machine, probably not a laptop if it's x86, but it's, so it's sitting there. But I don't understand why, like, is it not the frontier model that's doing most of the heavy lifting? Or do you need the hardware itself to be run by the agent in a certain way?


Like I kind of, yeah, paint the picture of how you're actually, like, cause for example, the ecdsa.fail example is very clearly software, right? Like it's a software problem, it's an algorithmic problem, like you're trying, and that to me is like the bread and butter of frontier models, like they're very good at that. But when you're talking about improving hardware, I guess, are you talking about like the way that the software is interacting with the hardware and the agents are changing that, and then you're running it on these machines and trying to figure out what kind of thing you can get out of it?


[Soubhik Deb] (22:19 - 23:20)
So I'll give an example on the Snark.fast itself. So the tricks that you do for accelerating, say, in the Snark.fast, that flock prover, it's very much dependent on the underlying hardware architecture that you are running. Apple Silicon has a very different architecture, it has its neural accelerators, they call it ANE, and it's very different from, say, you run this flock on GPU, it's a very different architecture.


Now, when you run this, suppose you are running this flock prover in your Apple Silicon, it should use all these tricks and techniques that are enabled by that particular architecture. This, how to use Apple's neural accelerator, it's a very particular tool. Even within, say, GPU, each series, like you have Ampere, you have Hopper, you have Grace, they all have different architectures and each software, and you write it and you want to take advantage of the underlying architecture for optimising it, it has to be very particular to that architecture.


[Anna Rose] (23:20 - 23:27)
I see. But you can't change the architecture, can you? Like, is the architecture, the hardware architecture, it's like, what you got, it's fixed.


[Soubhik Deb] (23:27 - 24:25)
Yeah, you got it. Okay. And now you have to use your software.


So what does software using in, like, say, Apple Silicon, what is it optimal? You have to ensure that the, whenever you are doing processing, you are caching based on how frequently you are accessing that data. If it's very fast, like you would need that data regularly, you should be accessing it somewhere very close.


There is all this bandwidth limitations, memory limitations are there. And so when you are running this competition, the Snark.Fast, the agents are actually optimising using your software. You need an Apple hardware for participating in the Snark.Fast, that Apple Silicon one. And the agent, your codecs or whatever agent, it's trying to run locally this solution, whatever solution it is coming up within your laptop, trying to come up with that. And then if it sees that it is beating the current leaderboard, then it submits it to the platform.


[Anna Rose] (24:26 - 24:44)
But is, like, going back to this, because it's a Snark, it's a, it's Flock, right? So I'm trying to picture what the submission looks like, like, what is the actual action? Like, are you, is it a prover that you're generating a proof and you're seeing how quickly you can do it?


What are you kind of trying to figure out here?


[Soubhik Deb] (24:44 - 25:16)
So in the Snark.Fast competition, the Flock thing, what we did is that some of the files can be changed by a submitter, you can't change the whole thing. It specifically puts that as the constraint, think of it like a constraint. And when I'm, as an auto researcher, running it locally, my agent knows what it can change.


And it's trying to optimise that, like that, that those files and those data loading and all these things, trying to change that.


[Anna Rose] (25:16 - 25:30)
And was that defined before by you? Was it, you said, here's the proving system, here's what we want to tackle, because it's not go ham on everything. It's here's like the specific bottlenecks that we want fixed.


[Soubhik Deb] (25:30 - 26:11)
This is the hardest part, like building a verified is the hardest. So that's where you need domain experts. So Ron, Tamir, Benedikt, they are like, these are the domain experts coming up, because they know what is slow, what can be optimised, and we work with them, like just ensure that these files can get changed.


And then now this is very important because I can just maliciously change arbitrarily any other file. I don't have to follow those rules. But now when I submit to the platform, the platform, the backend, our backend infrastructure should check that it's not changing some other weird files that is violating the constraint of that competition.


So that's a part of verification.


[Anna Rose] (26:12 - 26:35)
So because I remember like when we had Benedikt on and more recently we had Ron on, we did talk about snark.fast, but actually not in as much detail as this. In that, like the Flock paper has a verifier, but that is verifying the Flock prover that they created. In the case of the verifier that you're talking about for snark.fast, is it different?


Like is it different?


[Soubhik Deb] (26:35 - 26:37)
It's the same verifier. It's the same verifier. Verifier.


[Anna Rose] (26:37 - 26:43)
But then how do you improve on the verifier? Like then is it just, oh, they're able to get the verifier just to accept it faster?


[Soubhik Deb] (26:44 - 26:57)
So in this competition, we are not changing the protocol. The cryptographic protocol remains the same. That means the verifier can remain the same.


It's just implementation, can you make it more optimised for number of Blake 3 hash compressions per second?


[Anna Rose] (26:57 - 27:03)
But then, so it is speed. It's just you're trying to like get the verifier to sign off on a proof faster.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:03 - 27:03)
Yes.


[Anna Rose] (27:04 - 27:16)
Like to say, like the prover is proving and then the time from when the prover starts to the point where the verifier accepts it gets shorter as you get better at the engineering on this particular hardware. This particular hardware. Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:17 - 27:19)
Cool. So you see, there is so much specification.


[Anna Rose] (27:19 - 27:20)
Oh my gosh.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:20 - 27:26)
So it has to be, so building a verifier autoresearch, you have to be very careful what you are specifying, all these things.


[Anna Rose] (27:27 - 27:39)
I wonder, like, are there some problems? I mean, I want to go through more of the projects, but are there some problems that you sort of thought of doing, but then decided not to do because you can't put it in the framing that you need? Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:39 - 27:49)
This goes back into a much more bigger problem. There are a lot of problems which are ill posed. Ill posed, like poorly put together.


[Anna Rose] (27:49 - 27:50)
Yeah. Poorly asked.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:50 - 27:56)
I'll give an example. I'll give an example. Build me a quantum computer.


That's it. It's too broad. It's a very ill posed problem.


[Anna Rose] (27:56 - 27:56)
Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (27:56 - 28:48)
Yeah, too broad. We don't know what is it. But if you had broken down this problem, build me a quantum computer, then you'll find also that the problem state from ecdsa.fail is also one of the sub problems. You are now defining well posed problem. You're coming up with a series of sub problems which are well posed, and then you do autoresearch for each of them. So there are like a lot of such problems who we have hope for, but you need to break it down into this well posed problems.


This is a similar issue with proximity conjecture. So when we saw this proximity conjecture, like after our ecdsa.fail success, one of the things we wanted to do was, so there is a, EF has put $1 million for a proximity conjecture. Well, the proximity prize.


Yeah. Prize. So this could be, can we do autoresearch around that?


[Anna Rose] (28:48 - 28:48)
Wow.


[Soubhik Deb] (28:49 - 29:28)
And we didn't have anything internally. We didn't know like how to break this problem because it was the way the statement is written in the proximity gap conjecture, the prize is, it's a binary, either you prove it or not prove it. Yeah.


It's very hard to write a verifier for that. And what happened is that later on people, Alexander Hicks and Giacomo, who was in your show also recently, and so they wrote, they're, they're writing this lean verifier for, for a particular instantiation of this proximity gap conjecture, instantiation means the field size and all this thing, which code to use.


[Anna Rose] (29:28 - 30:11)
And that's what became better.codes. Better.codes, which is the proximity prize, like on the Yukon platform, it's the competition. That's interesting because actually, so proximity prize was announced quite a while ago, I think actually on our show, Justin announced it back, I feel like, when was this? I guess it was last year.


He announced it. And, but then it was interesting because it was almost like the prize was announced, but the actual framing of the prize, what, what is the competition? What has taken some time, I think, to properly define.


And what you're talking about here is like, this is sort of the conclusion of the first part, which was figuring out what the problem is and how to gauge it. And now here's a, here's a chance to run a competition.


[Soubhik Deb] (30:12 - 30:28)
I don't say it's a conclusion, but it took a lot of effort from Alexander and Giacomo and others, this, like coming up with a lean verifier, making sure that it is correct, like to a correct instance, that is helpful. Exactly. Because you can't take just random fields, random codes.


[Anna Rose] (30:28 - 30:59)
And I think that's what we saw in the research, like we saw a lot of attempts to sort of solve the problem. But without the constraints, we saw them kind of go in very different directions and you would get like lots of variables and different, yeah, kind of what you just described. So that's why that having domain experts is very important.


You just mentioned sort of the formal verification side of things. We're using lean in for this particular problem, but is that something that you expect to see more of to be used with these competitions? Like, do you kind of need something like that in order to even run them?


[Soubhik Deb] (30:59 - 32:06)
Yes. So, yes, for lean verifier, this lean provers and verifier, they are very helpful for doing checking that whatever the auto researchers are doing, they are correct or not. But it also constrains the type of problem, like how many problems you can solve.


Even though AI is becoming very good in writing this lean prover, what ideally will be much more helpful having natural language verifiers, like AI just trying to check by itself that oh, this whole, this submission, is it correct or not, instead of running through lean. Because lean is actually slow, you know, in the better.codes, there were like some of the auto researchers, they were saying that, oh, this is so slow, it takes time to do that. I mean, it's kind of, I'm sure that as like AI is becoming better and better in coding, so I'm sure this problem will be much more, like it will go away, hopefully.


But still the natural language verifier is the fastest thing that you can have. So I did that, but then you get stuck with the problem that the AI might have the biases. What are you going to do?


It's not objective. Lean is much more objective.


[Anna Rose] (32:07 - 32:07)
I see. Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (32:08 - 32:29)
It's a deterministic software at the end of the day. And lean and doing a natural language with AI is like, who God knows what is, like, what is this bias? It's, you have to then, you have to be just doing second guessing.


Got it. It's just hard. Like this is a harder problem.


And we are working on that. But on an immediate time scale, yeah, the having the lean is proving to be very helpful.


[Anna Rose] (32:29 - 33:08)
It's very helpful right now. Okay. Let's keep going through.


So we've mentioned now ECDSA.Fail, Snark.Fast, Better.Codes. You mentioned MLX. I don't know what the second part of it is. MLX.Fast. MLX.Fast. There's a bunch of projects on Yukon if you actually just go to the website. Some of them you mentioned were kind of like boxed, like there's a timeframe that they're actually running it and that it ends. Others are constantly active. Let's go through kind of some of these and like maybe actually just cover the ECDSA.Fail, Snark.Fast. Are those kind of perpetual? You don't have an end in sight?


[Soubhik Deb] (33:08 - 33:23)
ECDSA.Fail is perpetual. Snark.Fast, it has ended. Oh, it has ended.


Okay. Yeah. And, and, and in fact, Benedict has written a nice summary of what improvements they have gotten and how they're adding it to the actual Flux main branch now.


[Anna Rose] (33:23 - 33:23)
Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (33:23 - 33:25)
So that's kind of cool. So it has ended.


[Anna Rose] (33:25 - 33:27)
MLX.Fast. Over?


[Soubhik Deb] (33:28 - 33:50)
MLX.Fast has like a, it's, it's a, it's a meta programme where we optimise different, different open weight models and each open weight model optimisation has a limited time period, two weeks, three weeks. So we started with Laguna's model. Then we did Quent 3.7 model. Then we did one for Gemma, Gemma, which we got a shout out from Google's Gemma team.


[Anna Rose] (33:51 - 34:02)
Wow. And I see you're doing CUDA.Fast, which is for the Quent 3.8 Flash Next, which by the way I've been using and it's like insane. It's like a, it's Opus on your computer.


It's crazy.


[Soubhik Deb] (34:02 - 34:35)
So one, one of the things that, that is happening with the MLX, so I also, I want to put picture where MLX.Fast comes in a broader thing. So we have this Darkbloom project, which is about, you can plug your unused Mac, Mac, Macs to, to be a provider for inference and you, you use a bunch of the open weight models that you can load into your own MacBook, Mac Ultras and all this thing. So the way we are seeing MLX.Fast is a, is an R&D pipeline, an open R&D pipeline for Darkbloom's in-production inference network.


[Anna Rose] (34:36 - 34:38)
Wait, Darkbloom being your project?


[Soubhik Deb] (34:38 - 34:47)
Yeah, it's also our, one of our project and, and right now it is, it is the top provider for Gemma Force 26B model on open router.


[Anna Rose] (34:47 - 34:47)
Oh wow.


[Soubhik Deb] (34:48 - 35:03)
And we are loading new open weight models into that. The Darkbloom is a whole open network for, you can plug your MacBooks, unused MacBooks to serve inference. Nice.


And this MLX.Fast is like an open network of R&D for Darkbloom.


[Anna Rose] (35:03 - 35:22)
And we are optimising this on Apple Silicon. We actually have to talk about like the connection to Eigenlayer too. But I feel like there's, the step seems to be like Eigenlayer to Darkbloom to Yukon.


And specifically these competitions that are like MLX.Fast and I guess CUDA.Fast is another one in that.


[Soubhik Deb] (35:22 - 35:35)
MLX.Fast is one of the competitions that we are running under Yukon that directly ties up with Darkbloom. Okay. Does CUDA.Fast also?


Right now not yet because on Darkbloom we are only serving on Apple Silicon. Oh, I see. Okay.


[Anna Rose] (35:36 - 35:51)
Oh, and CUDA.Fast would be on non- GPUs. Okay. NVIDIA GPUs.


Got it. Some others that I'm actually just seeing on your site, you did mention the Lighter.Fast. That one's over. Yeah.


So this was from a company, like one company, one project was like, I want to accelerate.


[Soubhik Deb] (35:51 - 36:03)
So there is a good story around that. So, so Lighter.Fast, they already have an in-production lighter software for listeners who don't know the lighter. It's one of the perpetual, like biggest perpetual exchanges on YouTube.


[Anna Rose] (36:03 - 36:07)
Yeah. We've had them on the show. So they're like a ZK roll-up based perpdex.


[Soubhik Deb] (36:07 - 36:48)
Yeah. So they are using all the Mac, Mac's hardware for running their, the software, the ZK prover on their end. So now, now the question was, can you accelerate that?


Can you, can you optimise this thing? Because the more optimised their prover will be, the faster the throughput per second on their, on their exchange will be, which is directly helps into the perp setting. Perp is all about timing.


Right? So there is a direct correlation with the perp setting and optimising the ZK prover in their case. So we partnered with them and initially we, like their expectation, our expectation was that, yeah, maybe you can get 1.5X to 2X optimisation.


[Anna Rose] (36:48 - 36:49)
Yeah. What did they get?


[Soubhik Deb] (36:50 - 36:54)
It led to more than 10.5X optimisation. Wow. They must've been so happy.


[Anna Rose] (36:54 - 36:56)
In terms of throughput per, yeah, throughput per second.


[Soubhik Deb] (36:57 - 37:11)
Like, and, and it was crazy. So initially, initially the prize money was around 15,000 LIT tokens for this. And the amount of optimisation that happened, it ended up increasing it to 25,000 LIT tokens.


Yeah. It's like 90,000.


[Anna Rose] (37:11 - 37:32)
But I wonder for the participants right now, just a quick kind of side on the economics, like they're spending tonnes of like cash on running these models and inference. Are they getting, like, if they win the prize, do they actually get money or do they lose money on this? Like overall, it's probably a money loss because it's like shared among many participants, but like.


Yeah. I can talk about that.


[Soubhik Deb] (37:33 - 37:41)
So one thing that is, that is, people are realising is that if you take a $200 subscription, you are actually getting $20,000 worth of tokens.


[Anna Rose] (37:42 - 37:42)
Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (37:42 - 37:49)
So if you win prize money, which are in like $1,000 and like, yeah, it's actually makes you whole.


[Anna Rose] (37:49 - 37:54)
Yeah. As long as they're within that value, like as long as they're within that value.


[Soubhik Deb] (37:54 - 38:04)
Yeah. The way we are seeing this is that suppose you, from the other side, so you, this is we are talking about the auto researchers, but you have the other side is the problem creators.


[Anna Rose] (38:04 - 38:04)
Mm-hmm.


[Soubhik Deb] (38:05 - 38:35)
The personal people who domain experts, the people who have the problems. It's like an open infrastructure where you come and deploy your problems. You get access to a wide pool of people who are specialised, who are very much better in using their agents and models and harness and tool calls and everything.


Okay. So you're exposing your problem to a very good, like a wider group of people and, and you are getting access to a wider share of tokens being used for solving your problem. Cool.


[Anna Rose] (38:36 - 38:40)
And different models and different setups and harnesses and yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (38:40 - 39:14)
So ideally what you do, like if you do it a single player is you are using a same model. You probably don't have diversity of models. You can probably get a diverse model by hooking up Claude, Codex, Grok, something like that.


But then you don't have a diversity of prompts. You don't have a diversity of memory. You don't have a diversity of tool calls.


You don't know what people can use. I'll give an example on this. Like this is very relevant for proximity gap conjunction, better.codes. So better.codes, there is two bounds. There's a lower security bound, which is the soundness bound. And there's a upper security bound, which is about attack. Mm-hmm.


[Anna Rose] (39:14 - 39:18)
So just a reminder to the listener, this is the proximity prize competition.


[Soubhik Deb] (39:19 - 39:28)
And the lower security bound traditionally for many, many years, I think decades, people have known that it is stuck at some certain bound called Johnson bound.


[Anna Rose] (39:28 - 39:28)
Mm-hmm.


[Soubhik Deb] (39:29 - 39:52)
And what we saw in the better.codes, that specific instantiation, the whole competition was stuck on August 21. I specifically remember those days, on August 21 at 63.99 bits, 64 bits of the Johnson bound in that particular instantiation of the competition. Okay.


And then what happened is that for six days, there was no progress. No one was able to break.


[Anna Rose] (39:52 - 39:54)
You can see it, actually. I'm looking at your chart.


[Soubhik Deb] (39:54 - 39:55)
It's just a flat line.


[Anna Rose] (39:56 - 39:58)
Yeah. Until August 28.


[Soubhik Deb] (39:58 - 42:30)
What happened on 28? That's the very important thing. So one of our colleague, he contacted one of our big auto researcher from ecdsa.fail, Bartosz. He's a mathematician at Poland. And he's very, who has made a huge contribution in ecdsa.fail to make a lot of progress. So we thought maybe he has such a good setup that he can take a crack.


He's an algebraic geometry guy. He's not at all a cryptographer. He has never heard about this problem.


He comes and within a few hours, it went from 63.99 to 64.01 bits. And it is the, it led to a like, like it is, it is a first time where it goes, went beyond Johnson bond. It was surprising.


And the tricks that it used is some combination of algebraic geometry, something, something. We had to get some, one of the cryptographers, again, probably to know the details. And the surprising thing is that this is what Bartosz speculated that, that because he has been using his codex subscription lot for his own personal work around algebraic geometry.


Maybe when it tackled this problem, it applied techniques from algebraic geometry for this thing. So this is, this is open innovation at its best, right? It is a person who is not even, who is far from cryptography, suddenly comes and deploys his existing to setup and takes a crack.


And then suddenly the moment 64.01, it went, the whole, it's some, some, something happened. The whole wall broke down. It leaped by three bits.


It leaped. Something happened. People were chatting on Twitter about this Ariel Gabizon and Kobi and everyone was chatting.


I think it might be worth bringing one of the cryptographic expert to go over in details what exactly has happened. That's cool. Yeah.


It's, it's, it's something happened. And then the story didn't end here. Then few days later, some of the other cryptographers, they have a whole, there's a whole other bigger problem on coding theory, which has been open for since 30 years, I think, to come up with some kind of, like to prove some kind of this security bound.


And there are three papers that came up within days that said that they got inspired from the techniques that were used in breaking the Johnson bound that led to a break, some kind of breakthrough in this 30 year old problem. So cool. No one would have conceived that this series of events would have happened.


[Anna Rose] (42:31 - 42:31)
Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (42:31 - 42:35)
This is, this is like open innovation, collaborative research.


[Anna Rose] (42:35 - 43:12)
And it feels like it's at its infancy too. It's like the very beginning where people are kind of like, oh, whoa, okay. These problems that we thought would not be solved for a long time can be pushed along at least, like maybe not full solved, but like improved, improved, improved.


That's so cool. I want to keep going through some of these projects because a recent one, I actually saw this on Twitter. It was about Heesch.


I don't know if I'm pronouncing that right. Yes. So this is a, I mean, as far as I can understand it, it's like you build a shape.


And then it needs to, with 11 hexagons, I guess, what is it, 11? Yeah. It's pieces.


Some pieces.


[Soubhik Deb] (43:12 - 43:13)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (43:13 - 43:33)
And then you have to be able to like, using these shapes, like kind of build circles around each other. I mean, maybe you can explain it better, but they've maxed it out. Like they've never reached a certain level of rings and they're trying to reach this level of rings.


I mean, what kind of field of math is this? This is like totally different from what we usually talk about.


[Soubhik Deb] (43:33 - 43:54)
It's like shapes. This is some kind, yeah. Shapes, styling, this is whole geometry.


Geometry. Yeah. So the person who is like the domain expert, every problem has some kind of domain expert for this is the mathematician Bartosz.


Like this is really such a good story, like Bartosz, we came to know him from ECDSA.Fields. So he's been working, this is the same guy.


[Anna Rose] (43:54 - 44:00)
This is the guy who has an amazing setup. But is this his actual field? This is like what he actually works on.


[Soubhik Deb] (44:00 - 44:08)
This is his actual, yes. Okay. This is his field.


And he has actually got featured in the OpenAI's ChatGPT release about how using math. He was one of the three people who was featured.


[Anna Rose] (44:09 - 44:09)
Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (44:09 - 44:28)
So he helped in this breakthrough in Better.Codes. And now we are working with him on a series of math problems. So the first one is this Heesch problem, which you mentioned. Yes, exactly.


This is the tile that you have to come up with a piece. You put the piece and then you have to use the same piece to create layers around it.


[Anna Rose] (44:28 - 44:42)
Which is like a full ring which covers each surface. I don't know if that really explains it, but it's almost like we'll add a link to the... It fits the whole thing.


But yeah, it's pretty cool. And it's quite easy as just a viewer to kind of understand what they're trying to do.


[Soubhik Deb] (44:42 - 45:16)
Yeah. And the piece, so there is a constraint. The piece has to be made of triangles, squares, or rectangles, this thing.


Not like irregular sheets. It has to be a combination of that. And the current record, I believe it's the known literature record that was it at four.


You can create four tight layers with this piece. If five will be a breakthrough, like it's a huge mathematical discovery. And the way the competition is going, it's very close.


You can make an approximate 4.98 layers.


[Anna Rose] (45:17 - 45:23)
Yeah. But when I look at these, just to check, like it looks like there's like 11 hexagons. Is that what it actually has to be?


[Soubhik Deb] (45:24 - 45:26)
It's a combination of triangles, rectangles, squares.


[Anna Rose] (45:26 - 45:30)
You make it into... You end up looking like that. Okay.


Just in this graphic.


[Soubhik Deb] (45:30 - 45:37)
I got it. Yeah. You can come up with any style shape.


Okay. The constraint is, can you build a five layer out of that shape?


[Anna Rose] (45:37 - 46:05)
Yeah, exactly. So five rings, basically, you're trying to get. And it looks like the last submission, the kind of furthest along submission has just a few points where basically you want the ring to completely cover the outside surface.


But they haven't quite made it to five. Right now, I'm seeing like 4.9881. And you see these little points, the outside ring still has like a few points where they can't quite fully cover it. Caps.


Yeah. Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (46:06 - 47:35)
And this is actually a hard problem. So what we are also doing is that with this Heesch problem, exactly, we launched a feature on the Yukon, which is about discussion format. So many times what happens is that as you are exploring research, you're doing research, you don't fully explore the whole thing.


You go until something, sometime and you have a lot of other things that you want to explore, but you don't have time. So what happens is you hope that some other people will take up the remaining pieces and explore that. So what we are doing is we piloted this with the Heesch problem, this GitHub discussions where agents, it's all there in the CLI, like you don't even have to think, prompt your agent, it's in the CLI.


And the agents, when they are doing research, doing hill search, trying to strategise in your local site, they are also pushing discussions into this GitHub discussion board. And other agents are picking it up. Sometimes in this case, Bartosz is responding to this thing.


It's like you can manually steer, like when Bartosz, the domain expert here, is responding then the agents are actually reading those responses, they're getting steered by the domain expert. This is something we want to make it flushed out completely is that the domain expert should be able to see that why this open network of auto research has gone in their problem statement and then they steer, right? They have the best intuition.


So they steer it, they left clues, they left like what should be explored and all this thing. So we are piloting that also.


[Anna Rose] (47:36 - 48:01)
So cool. Okay, now I want to hear more about the sandbox, the platform. And we still have to talk about the connection to Eigenlayer because Eigenlayer is a very different project from what I remember.


Maybe it's not that different, but it was like traditionally all about restaking. So you could run things like a DA system on top of it. But how does Yukon connect to Eigenlayer and is Darkbloom in between here?


[Soubhik Deb] (48:01 - 49:10)
Yeah, I can start from the origin story, like from our Eigen labs. So our goal always has been to unleash the open innovation. We always believe that it's more outside talent than internal within an org or within these things.


So how you build products that lead to this kind of open innovation, like enabling these people outside to be able to build something that others would like to use. So Eigenlayer was the thesis of that. There's a platform, there's a capital like Ethereum, there's a lot of E3 stake into that.


Can you have a software that you build that you can reuse the security for economically securing your software? You don't have to build your own blockchain or all these things. So that was open innovation.


It's the same line of thinking that is happening on Yukon and Darkbloom. In Yukon, it's a platform where you can come and launch your problem statement if you're a domain expert. And on the other hand, there is a lot of outside talent, which might be much more proficient in using agents.


There could be other domain experts who know how to navigate the hills and they are trying to attack the problem.


[Anna Rose] (49:11 - 49:24)
Except, does Yukon use any of the AVS sort of restaking? No, it's a completely different platform. What about Darkbloom?


So Darkbloom, you were saying, is a place where people can actually sell their compute, their unused compute.


[Soubhik Deb] (49:25 - 50:16)
So Darkbloom is a place where... So what happened is that when OpenClaw was its hype, people bought all these MacBooks, Mac hardware, so Mac are not even available for a long time after that. So the hype died down after a month.


And then there is a lot of unused hardware. What are you going to do with that? What we thought is that this Darkbloom is the place where you can plug your unused Mac hardware.


And on the other side, there is this inference, people who need inference, where this inference will get routed to the people who are serving models and they will process it and they will send a request in return for certain fees. Now the important thing is that you need to have privacy. Suppose I'm one of the people who are running a MacBook in this Darkbloom network, I plugged it into this.


[Anna Rose] (50:16 - 50:20)
And I send you whatever I'm asking, but it's so in the...


[Soubhik Deb] (50:20 - 50:29)
Yeah, it's like completely clear text. Yeah, you don't want me to... So Apple has a bunch of privacy preserving mechanisms within that.


So we took advantage of that to enable...


[Anna Rose] (50:29 - 50:30)
TEs mostly, I guess?


[Soubhik Deb] (50:31 - 50:44)
It's their enclave, secure enclaves. It's a version of TE, but within Apple Silicon, they have their own version. And we took advantage of that, that anyone providing the inference request, I'm not able to see your request.


[Anna Rose] (50:44 - 50:51)
So basically, like if I sent my request, it goes into your secure enclave that you cannot actually access either.


[Soubhik Deb] (50:51 - 51:07)
There is a network, the coordinator, the central coordinator, which does the load bearing, load balancing, request to see whom we should get diverted to, based on past performance or the availability of the machine right now and all these things. And Darkbloom primarily looks at Apple.


[Anna Rose] (51:07 - 51:11)
It's for Apple Silicon right now. Okay. And how are people compensated?


Are they compensated with Eigen?


[Soubhik Deb] (51:11 - 51:18)
So we started, we piloted this whole thing with US dollars, actually US dollars, not Eigen.


[Anna Rose] (51:18 - 51:19)
Not even USDC?


[Soubhik Deb] (51:19 - 51:46)
Yeah, not even USDC. We expanded, we are expanding to that. And recently we had a partnership with OpenRouter, where they relay the request to a lot of inference providers.


If you go to their board, you'll see this list of these things. So Darkbloom is now listed as one of the inference providers on OpenRouter. And right now for Gamma 26b model, it is the top most network inference provider.


[Anna Rose] (51:47 - 52:00)
So if you use an agent with OpenRouter and you pick, like you can choose within OpenRouter, like Darkbloom would be an option, but what models would actually be served? I guess it's all the open models, so like K3 and...


[Soubhik Deb] (52:00 - 52:05)
Right now we have, no, not K3, the small enough models that can get fit into an Apple.


[Anna Rose] (52:05 - 52:06)
Oh, yeah. Okay.


[Soubhik Deb] (52:06 - 52:12)
So we plan to have this multi-Apple devices that can serve bigger models, but not right now.


[Anna Rose] (52:13 - 53:06)
Cool. I want to return to the story of Yukon, because it just does feel like very much on the frontier of a lot of things that I'm tracking, that I think a lot of our community is tracking. Right now you have, I don't know how many, like 12 active challenges or challenges that have been hosted.


How do you go forward? Do you imagine a world where you have hundreds of competitions going? Do you think that Yukon will evolve somehow?


Because I love this. I think a lot of people who really get inside it are kind of amazed, but it also feels like that's, it feels like something that works really well maybe because it's small. Like also if you guys are providing the prizes, like there's only so much funding I imagine that you're going to provide to this platform.


So I am curious about like, where does Yukon go? What do you sort of envision as a future here?


[Soubhik Deb] (53:07 - 55:22)
So this is very relevant question. I think with the current scenario, how people are thinking about AI and for scientific discovery, we really see Yukon evolving as the AI native scientific institution. What does that mean is that research traditionally, scientific research, academic research, industrial research has been always about building on top.


So there are certain traits that are there. What does, like this institution should emulate these traits, right? So I want to list out the traits.


Like research means building on top of each other's idea. Second, you should be giving credits on whose idea you have built. Third, even the failed ideas should be given credits for that because so many times actually out of thousand failures, you get one success.


That's kind of the thing that's always there in research. So these three traits are so important. And what is happening with the arrival of AI is that the whole life cycle of like doing a research has accelerated from like months or years to like days.


This ECDSA dot fail, these are actually an example of how breakthroughs can happen in like within like hours or days. Like it's just crazy. Like I was thinking that these are like a bunch of new couple of move 37s that have happened on an AI, like on research.


And we are like, as part of this Yukon's evolution, we are trying to have this credit system, partial credit system, where people can credit each other's ideas or negative space credits, like where people fail, failed ideas are also given credit. And then coming up with a system where if you have an in-post problem, can you break it? Can the system actually help you in breaking down into a sub series of sub problems that are well-posed?


So these are the things that we are trying to build on Yukon because this is how we see that the future of AI research, AI enabled scientific discovery and scientific research will happen. Cool. The way the way the current system, if you see that Twitter, how that mathematicians are saying that that AI should not be used that much for doing math, because it does not give you insight.


[Anna Rose] (55:22 - 55:39)
Frontier labs are kind of stealing potentially the thoughts of mathematicians. If mathematicians are using the models and then those models all of a sudden like have these breakthroughs, possibly due to like the use of the product, it's problematic a little bit. I think that seems to be the question today.


[Soubhik Deb] (55:39 - 56:22)
Yeah. This Navier-Stokes saga drama has actually put that into a limelight. So this credit systems and all this are so important.


I'll say that Bitcoin's fundamental technology of proof of work was built on credits, right? You build on top of each other's block. You can prove, verify other people's proof of work, like whether they have actually come up with the correct nonce for that hash.


It's something similar to that. Like, can you have an agent programmatic system where people can verify that that person has done real work? Can you credit that person's work?


Even the negative work? This is a hard problem. And especially with AI being like enabling, like making everything fast, I think this is the problem we have to tackle.


[Anna Rose] (56:22 - 56:54)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. But what you just said, so future of Yukon is building tools to be able to break ill-posed problems into sub-problems that are more like something you could tackle with agents. And then it's like clearly there's a verification step.


Then there's building. Is it building the community too? Like you need to have all of these people who are aware of this and are locked into it.


And then I guess you have the credit, so you want to be able to, like, make sure that you can associate each contribution with some, some agent. It's still agents. It's not really people.


But yeah. Yeah.


[Soubhik Deb] (56:54 - 57:05)
It's there. They paid for it. So.


Yep. That's what we want to do. It's some manner, it is like from first principles, how do we build an AI-native institution for scientific discovery?


Crazy.


[Anna Rose] (57:05 - 57:09)
But then how do you fund, like how are you funding the participants?


[Soubhik Deb] (57:10 - 57:29)
So this goes back to that examples I was giving for lighter.fast and better.course is that the people who want some problems solved and they want to take benefit of this collaborative research, auto-research network, they should be putting some rewards that incentivises people to participate and tackle their problem.


[Anna Rose] (57:30 - 58:04)
So you, you expect it to be more like some team, like the lighter example where like a project comes up and says, I need help with this. X, Y, Z. It could be like a big, it could be like Google or something like big, you know, tech company comes forward and it's like, we're trying to tackle this engineering problem.


Can you, and then you, you help them frame it. They offer the bounties or the funding mechanism, which could be a weekly check-in on like how much contribution has happened that week. And then you start to develop it.


But what about those really hard mathematical problems that like maybe companies don't care about?


[Soubhik Deb] (58:04 - 59:10)
Yeah. I want to get. So there are two separate personas of this part.


There is the problem creator, who is the domain expert. And there is a person who is interested in seeing that problem solved, but has the funding for doing that. This always happens in the traditional research institutions.


Many of the prize money is a millennium prize problems or solving rare disease problems. The funder is a very different person who cares about the problem, but the person who is the domain expert, who's putting out the specifics of the problem is, it is a domain expert, is a different person. So we, we envision that there'll be people who might say, I'll take the Heesch example.


Bartosz is a domain expert coming up with this Heesch problem, but there'll be someone else who is interested in seeing the beauty of this problem, wants to see that it gets funded. Because that's how traditional research, this starts from the Renaissance era in Europe, right? Where Medici families, they were not the domain experts in art, but they're finding my funding, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci and all these guys, right?


So it always has been there in history, like the two different personas.


[Anna Rose] (59:11 - 1:00:28)
We need to find a way to incentivise that sort of funder persona, though, if it's not a company. Right. It's so interesting as you go through this, there's echoes to me of things like Gitcoin where those are like these experiments that were run in the past.


We were pretty involved in that. We had a grant. We also helped organise the ZK track at Gitcoin.


That was like projects building a certain technology and then people out of the community wanting to fund that, those things. There were, I mean, the reason I think of Gitcoin is they also did project specific fund rate, like funding rounds. So like Zcash ran one, specifically just Zcash, like anything built with Zcash or like kind of around that ecosystem.


And it also reminds me a little bit of ZK Hack, which I keep trying to insert into the history of things. But basically we were running this like test for, it was like these problem spaces that anyone could participate in. And it was a way to sort of highlight talent.


Like a lot of people got hired because they participated in this, they learned, they excelled and then they were hired. In this case, like the participants, do you see sort of a future step? I mean, you kind of talked about Bartosz, who you've like, who you contacted.


You were like, hey man, you had a really good setup. Can you come help us over here? Like do you think that kind of thing could start happening?


[Soubhik Deb] (1:00:28 - 1:01:32)
You will see that many people when they are, they start as an auto researcher. If you go to ecds.org, many people who started auto, now they have become kind of semi-experts right now. On quantum computing, it's crazy.


So then that means people who want the other problems get solved, they can, they can be in touch with them, getting feedback on that. And of course, if there are more quantum computing competitions, they will be the people who will be most excited to participate because they have built the skill set. I'll consider them as semi-domain experts in this.


And this is one of the things that we are seeing is that this is something like, even though I have come through the whole academic structure, but one thing I have always, it has not like in my mind is that there's a lot of gatekeeping is there in academics. You have to pass through this, you have to get selected for a PhD programme, someone takes it. But there has been always a lot of interested people who are, who see some of the problem statement as a hobby.


I'll give you, there is an example like that, there's one of the top participants in ecdsa.fail is a landscape designer.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:33 - 1:01:33)
Wow.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:01:33 - 1:01:58)
There's another guy who is a rancher. But now they, in the side hobby, they were participating in ecdsa.fail, they know a lot about quantum circuits. Which is crazy.


Our traditional academic structure, research structure was never set up to enable such kind of people. It's always about papers and all this thing. But like there are a lot of people who are very scientifically curious about learning new problem statements, trying to attack them.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:59 - 1:02:09)
I mean, as much as we're kind of down on the academia though, but I think the reason it's set up the way it is, is because in the past, it's been so difficult to coordinate massive amounts of brains. Exactly.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:02:09 - 1:02:10)
That is the problem.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:10 - 1:02:26)
Because you couldn't deal with tonnes of brains, you had to pick some brains and they had these heuristics and they're not perfect, but they did pretty good. They got here, right? They tried to sort of find the brains that they thought would be the most effective at solving the problems.


And those are the people that ended up.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:02:26 - 1:02:28)
The machinery was missing. The machinery of doing that is missing.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:28 - 1:03:06)
Well, it's just the machinery to tap into all of the brains. Yeah. And also the heuristics were always imperfect.


So you ended up with like, I mean, human heuristics are always like political and like, I like this person, therefore I'm going to kind of give them a little bit of a leg up. As much as they claim to be objective, it's inevitable that that's inhuman. But yeah, with huge coordination, like technologies that have come on, thanks in part to the blockchain stuff, I feel like there's so much more potential to tap into that.


Plus we have the acceleration of the agents because we shouldn't pretend that these are just people, right? Yeah. They're people running their agents.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:03:06 - 1:03:32)
And also these are not just agents, they are actually humans who are prompting. The discussions that are going on, exchange of ideas among humans, that is happening in ECDSA.Phil. Better.Codes that I saw in the Telegram channels and the Slack channel, there's a lot of human element that is there. People are sharing.


And it's so fun. Like you're sharing ideas. What is the next strategy you want to attack?


You build on that, the other person builds on top of that.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:32 - 1:03:59)
It's just fun. Amazing. So, Shabak, I want to say thank you so much for coming on and sharing with us the story of Yukon.


I've been so curious and kind of diving into it with you and going through some of these cases. It's really helped me to understand what you're doing. How do people get involved?


And maybe what can they expect in the coming months? Because right now, like we said, there's about a dozen projects up, but tell us how they get involved and what to expect.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:04:00 - 1:05:03)
Yep. The best place to know all the active competitions and what has happened in the past is go to Yukon.org website. And if you scroll down, you'll see the list of competitions.


Go to the competitions that you like, and you will have guidelines on how you participate, what prompts you can give your agents to start optimising, participate in those competitions. And just directly DM us, like how you can get into the Slack channels and all. You will have the Slack channel link in the website itself.


Just join there and you will have access to our fellow auto researchers who are also hammering down these problems. So that's how you participate. On coming days and weeks and months, some of the verticals we are targeting, we are going deeper.


So cryptography is as a vertical. It is very nicely built for writing verifiers. Especially ZK1s because there's verifiers.


ZK1s. Exactly. Yeah.


And this somehow echoes with Nicola's blog post on generative cryptography. Yes. Generative cryptography.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:04 - 1:05:08)
Yeah. We're going to hopefully get a chance to explore more of that on the show. It's so cool.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:05:08 - 1:06:09)
Right. And so we will have a lot more competitions coming up with on cryptography in partnership with EIF and other people. And the second vertical that we are targeting is around MLX fast, which is inference optimisation.


So we have a lot more models we are doing. This is primarily why we are going deeper on MLX fast. This is two parts.


One is for a dog bloom. And second, we really believe in open source AI to be as a deterrent against hyper centralisation. So we want to enable open source models to be as good as possible that serves people's needs.


And this is our way. This MLX fast is our way of contributing towards making local AI with open rate models as competent as possible to against the closed models also. Besides these two verticals, we are trying to expand to other verticals like biology, chemistry, material science specifically, and cyber security also.


So hopefully we'll have something on those new verticals soon enough.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:10 - 1:06:13)
Very soon. Very cool. Thank you so much for coming on the show.


[Soubhik Deb] (1:06:14 - 1:06:15)
Thanks, Anna, for having me.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:16 - 1:06:22)
All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik and Tanya, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.
