Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week we revisit the topic of ZK and Identity with my guest Lasha Antadze, co-founder of Rarilabs, the team behind Rarimo. We cover Lasha's contributions to ID systems over the years, starting with his work in the government context to eventually building in the decentralized identity space.


He shares key lessons learned from trying to implement identity solutions within existing institutional frameworks versus building with cutting-edge technologies in open ecosystems. He highlights the inertia of legacy systems, how technologies can become obsolete before they are even deployed, and how the friction between outdated infrastructure and a rapidly evolving world has motivated new approaches.


We cover how Rarimo is approaching the problem with their initial work using the scannable chips and modern passports as a means to bring government-issued IDs into a private yet verifiable onchain registry, as well as their latest exploration into biometrics and onchain behavior as a means to define a unique person.


We compare this approach to other emerging ID solutions and discuss the applications both onchain and in the real world that these ID solutions unlock.


Now, before we kick off, I just want to let you know about zkSummit13, which is happening in Toronto on May 12. zkSummit is our biannual event where you will learn about the latest in ZK research, the newest applications, and find out who are the most important players in ZK today. It's also a wonderful way to get to know the larger ZK community. So if you've never been to a zkSummit, I hope you'll join us. To check out the speakers, program, more info about the event, and a link to join, please visit zksummit.com. I've added the link in the show notes.


Now Tanya will share a little bit about this week's sponsor.


Tanya [02:17] You might already know the ZK Jobs Board, a place where teams can share open roles with our community. But when it comes to key hires, finding the right fit in our niche space can be difficult. That's where Missing Link comes in.


They're a talent team built for the Web3 era, helping projects across the ecosystem connect with the right candidates at the right time. They've worked with names you'll recognize, Ethereum Foundation, Matter Labs, Lido, Mina, Web3 Foundation, and many more, filling critical roles that drive these teams forward.


Whether you're an established project looking to fill a senior leadership role, or a startup searching for specialized talent to refine your product market fit, Missing Link can help. They've done it for some of the biggest teams in the space, helping them, and now you, find the right people fast.


For more details, check out the show notes and visit their website at missing-link.io. So thanks again, Missing Link.


And now here's our episode.


Anna Rose [03:18] Today, I dive into the topic of identity with my guest Lasha, co-founder at Rarilabs, the team that has built Rarimo.


Welcome to the show, Lasha.


Lasha Antadze [03:28] Thanks Anna. Thanks for having me.


Anna Rose [03:30] So Lasha, tell us a little bit about your work, and what led you to work on identity.


Lasha Antadze [03:36] Identity, I think, overall in this space is most broad and unclear thing in general. I think, like then, what usually happens is we're adding some technical innovations to it, and then it becomes this kind of blurry line that people associate with different things.


So most probably if you ask non-crypto person what identity is, they're going to say, oh my passport. That's what my identity is. But, I guess, in Web3 we've given it another dimension. It's not only about your real world identifiers, but something more that has a more depth in terms of your interactions and more like this kind of social identity aspect that is uncovering.


We at Rarimo really started off by researching what was happening in space and what was changing. So what were these new primitives or technical innovations we could work on into of redefining what Web3 identity should have been.


I actually like -- a bit like going into the past, I had this very first interaction of digital identities about 10 years ago. It was my first job. I work with different governments. Back then, we didn't even had this digital identity as a phrase. So mostly everyone would refer to is, well, we're working on digital signatures and electronic ID document issuance and stuff.


So there was this ethos back then. And, I guess, identity in a digital world has this, at least this 10 year cycles of getting reimagined and reinvented.


Anna Rose [05:33] Renamed?


Lasha Antadze [05:34] Renamed. Yeah. Renamed to get away from the old pitfalls.


Anna Rose [05:41] Although, wasn't 5 years ago the self-sovereign identity? So it was like SSI. Like maybe before it was electronic ID, then it was SSI, and now zkID, I guess. I don't know.


Lasha Antadze [05:54] Yeah. That's the thing. So if you look at this, we can call it like 5-year cycles. But the problem always is that it doesn't matter. It's builders, governments, certain organizations trying to standardize certain things about identity. They can't come up with a framework, like for example, digital signature framework.


And there was this huge incentive in EU that, if you remember, they wanted to create this network of individuals who could sign and interact with them in an EID form. But when they put out something, and that what happens always, and the same happened with self-sovereign identity in my opinion.


So once the tech in that framework reaches the maturity, something like a black swan in a new innovation pops up, and then it makes everything like this, all the work prior and all this paperwork mostly, because that's what governments and especially institutions love, redundant, and then it's a new dilemma.


Anna Rose [06:59] So interesting.


Lasha Antadze [07:00] Oh, we have now zero-knowledge proofs, and zero-knowledge proofs provide a completely new type of interaction, and like these privacy guarantees. And suddenly, all these papers or how self-sovereign credential based things should work might not be applicable. And then it takes a couple of years for the industry to shift the focus on this new realm.


And unfortunately, I have to be blunt and open. We have not really seen this productization, or this even the business models, or the scale up things working. And that's why when you mention identity, I don't know with investors, or this people who have seen all these cycles, the first thing is like, oh my God. That is like a puzzle that nobody solved. And it's like non fundable, no business model, nothing.


Anna Rose [07:57] Damn.


Lasha Antadze [07:58] So I'd say we're into this third cycle right now. But, I don't know, call it this kind of entrepreneurial belief, that I can say returned to this identity paradigm to solve it. I had that more conviction that now we had enough tools to reinvent it, not productize it. Let's call it this way.


Anna Rose [08:26] Yeah.


Lasha Antadze [08:27] To create something that is understandable, usable and does not follow this boring pattern of identity being just for compliance, KYC purposes. And I think the blockchain world and zero-knowledge proofs give this new dimension. So that's why I'm optimistic.


Anna Rose [08:50] I want to go back about 10 years ago. So you were working with governments, you said. This at the time was called electronic ID. What were you doing? What kind of projects were you doing back then?


Lasha Antadze [09:04] Oh my God. So I've touched different things. One, I had some interaction with this biometric passport issuance, but it was more like internal work of, with the government of Ukraine on how do we make it more efficient? How do we do this new type of signatures within these documents?


But apart from that, you had some other incentives brought by Estonian government that back then, that was top notch.


Anna Rose [09:35] The ultimate, the future.


Lasha Antadze [09:37] Yeah. They launched this e-Residency program where you could obtain -- it was a digital signature, nothing else. You would have to -- I was one of the first residents back then. So I applied and I went to the council of Estonian government and I got my card. I still have it somewhere.


But basically, it was like, okay, now we figured out how these electronic signatures work, how we can have this legal weight. So if two counterparts are signing, and somehow extend these two parties' signatures into to a world where there are no borders.


So two people across EU can sign digital documents, make agreements, do all these different type of interactions, and keep it as a legal tender ledger.


Anna Rose [10:29] Yeah. And I mean what this -- maybe just to clarify what that was too. Because, I mean, I've been in Europe for a long time, and the Estonian e-Residency, you get some digital identity as being kind of part of the country, and then, you're able to start a company there. I think that's often how it's used, right?


Lasha Antadze [10:46] Yeah.


Anna Rose [10:47] And it's all online, and it's very streamlined, and I know it's been used. I mean, I have lots of friends who've done companies there. I looked at it once. I think there was an issue though, as far as I remember, like banking. Like once you start interfacing with the rest of the world, it's still not working always that well, but maybe they've solved that since then, but.


Lasha Antadze [11:07] I think they did, but it took couple of years. So the momentum of onboarding the users and really offering this variety of government services, or public services, it never happened in a digital form. So you could open a company, but you could not open -- not being physical in that place, the bank account. And that was like, why do I need a company if I can open a bank account and need to fly in it.


So it never really took off in that format. And then, you had all these governments having their own signatures, and then you needed what I was working on, and there was this incentive called STORK 2.0. It was basically how do we harmonize different signatures issued by different governments so everybody -- it's more like this certificate management and key management infra between the government. So EU is one digital economy in that sense.


Most of the people don't remember this thing. But then this STORK 2.0 evolved in today's eIDAS incentive which is like --


Anna Rose [12:15] Wait, eIDAS?


Lasha Antadze [12:18] Yeah. It's an electronic authentication identification thing that it's basically now on this ethos of verified credentials. So you can have a wallet where you're issued the verified credential of your identity. You can store your driving license, you can store your national stuff. It's all in the wallet. And you can selectively disclose.


So where the governments and institutions came is this, you can selectively disclose certain aspects of your identity, and you can have a wallet.


But then, cryptography and the technology always love to do, while they're working on that selective disclosure, suddenly we have a new paradigm with the zero-knowledge proofs. So you don't selectively disclose, you just don't disclose it, but make it provable and verifiable. And that's where people are like, oh my God, what's next?


Anna Rose [13:16] And they're just maybe -- I mean actually where is the STORK 2.0 at? Is it something that was rolled out or exists or is it --


Lasha Antadze [13:23] No. it was just --


Anna Rose [13:24] It stopped.


Lasha Antadze [13:26] Yeah. It didn't stop. It is a predecessor of now eIDAS project. So it was evolution -- they call it the evolution.


Anna Rose [13:34] And the e-I-D-A-S, eIDAS, is that released?


Lasha Antadze [13:38] No.


Anna Rose [13:39] That's in development?


Lasha Antadze [13:40] That's in development. There are certain timelines, there are this discussion in terms of privacy.


Anna Rose [13:46] This seems to be the story of our lives right now, is like the slowness of large scale societal processes, often run by governments, versus the needs and changing technology and changing landscape. It's so crazy.


Lasha Antadze [14:02] Exactly. Exactly. So this is the pattern of innovation, and the standardization even driven from top down. And that requires a lot of coordination between the governments. And it never happened. It never happened, not only in identity.


So why this entire crypto space? And now, people are fascinated that stablecoins move so quickly, and this is the best use case, right?


Anna Rose [14:30] Yeah. Even the stablecoins, I remember in 2017, speaking to a friend who had an agency, and his agency was working with governments to try to define their stablecoin strategy.


Lasha Antadze [14:42] Yeah.


Anna Rose [14:43] So far I have not seen that happen. And it's not going to come out of the government. That seems to be the truth.


Lasha Antadze [14:49] True.


Anna Rose [14:50] I want to go back to your story though. So at what point does Rarilabs or the Rarimo Project start?


Lasha Antadze [14:56] It starts about 2 years ago, and it starts with this exact R&D. So we're researching what is this new paradigm of identity that could be built. And I have a red line. If it crosses anything that has to do with governments, institutions, their adoption, and any requirement from them to bless the system to work, that's a red flag for me. Because I've seen that.


Anna Rose [15:24] It has to work without them in a way.


Lasha Antadze [15:26] So I basically make this division. So whatever we're building, whatever identity as a product we're forming, or architecturally, how it's designed, if it is breaking the status quo or everything that all these institutions and government are working on, then it's the right direction. So it's more like this kind of directionally right. 


So in a way, from this R&D and learning of everything that other teams have been doing, our role has evolved into -- I sometimes call it like this course correcting of the fact that we have this, the island of freedom in the form of the crypto. So how should we build the identity on the same ethos, and not make the mistakes that has been done prior to us. And for the first time really design a system that is scalable and instantly available to anyone in any part of the world.


So I'm kind of -- sometimes I refer to like, after doing all this research, I just sat and I said like, how would Satoshi build identity with all that friction that exists in real world? And how do we make it as a tool for, once again, the individual freedom to do something, and get away from, one, government control, institutional control, and to just remove all the dependence.


Anna Rose [17:05] That's interesting.


Lasha Antadze [17:05] And that's what Rarimo is. It's basically, it's a new framework, I can call that way.


Anna Rose [17:13] If you're saying 2023 is the starting point of Rarimo, there have been identity projects that date back. I don't know the exact start date, and I feel like I've already on this show at times, probably said the wrong date. But I like iden3, as far as I can tell, existed in 2017, and maybe it was founded before. I don't know the exact timing.


Lasha Antadze [17:35] Yeah. I mean, there's been many projects and iterations. We had even identity systems that were leveraging NFTs Soulbound tokens, trying to create this alternative --


Anna Rose [17:46] Yes, yes. Sismo.


Lasha Antadze [17:49] Yeah. Onchain alternatives to all these verified credentials, which are offchain instances. So verified credential is your own on your wallet.


And then what iden3 introduced is verified credentials make provable on chains through zero-knowledge proof. So that was the innovation there. And building this framework help blockchains become as an infrastructure where you publish a state, you build up these trees of commitments, and then make it like zero-knowledge provable.


So we really liked that foundation. We played with it. We a bit disassembled and reassembled in our own way. But I do agree that beside all that tries, where blockchains come in, it's about using a blockchain as an infrastructure and a registry.


Anna Rose [18:43] Exactly. Something immutable that you can track -- it basically is like that's the certification just without a third party doing it in a lot of ways.


Lasha Antadze [18:51] So it's this kind of open database. And that's what Rarimo is actually. At its core, it's a registry. It's an identity registry that is deployed as Layer 2, and it allows users to bring real world identities such as passports, or biometric scans, or any attribute, or any abstract statement onto this registry. But the basic function of this registry is that it's a ZK.


So it's just these random hashes. So if you look publicly, you don't understand anything. You don't understand correlation, you don't understand how to trace it. It's just this randomized metric structure. But as a user was the one that initiated all this record keeping and putting this data, they retrospectively can prove the certain aspect or certain attributes about themselves.


So that's how Rarimo started. So it's this, fundamentally, we need to agree, how do we put all these statements, identity-related data onchain, and make everything ZK verified. So it's this kind of primitive building blocks of identity-related identities, and that could in time evolve into these complex private social graphs that could be leveraged by different applications.


Anna Rose [20:23] Interesting. I was going to ask you because you mentioned sort of like, in the creation of the onchain identity, you're putting biometrics potentially, or a passport scan, or something like that. But I wondered if you were also experimenting with adding onchain activity. Like if you owned something, if you had traded something, if you had moved into something, engaged with some address, what have you.


This was originally the Sismo model. We did an episode with Sismo two years ago. So it's a company that's no longer around. But what they were really focused on was that onchain behavior in creating some sort of identity. So I wonder if you're also kind of including that or kind of following in that spirit.


Lasha Antadze [21:03] In general, as a primitive of the registry building blob, yes. So you can do that, and I loved what Sismo did.


Anna Rose [21:12] It was also one of my favorites. I was sad when they shut down.


Lasha Antadze [21:16] Yeah. But they're mostly, they were bringing these onchain activities using the primitives as NFTs. So you could capture all that in a privacy-preserving way.


What we put out as a registry is universal. I mean, the community has really liked that. Even Vitalik got so much excited about this framework that then our devs and Vitalik, they co-authored this primitives of the registry into an ERC. So now it's like 7812 that exists, that we together created, and it just gives you ability to build up any type of commitment statements, relations, and capture it into this registry.


But us, as a team, we more focus on bringing in this, first, real world identities and making them workable with the crypto world. Which is a challenge. So that's why we put out, first, the passport registry. So realizing that passports has biometric chips, and you can tap on your phone and suddenly bring it onchain, make it verifiable.


So we did entire kind of vertical of passports, and now -- we did it a year ago. Now passports are like everybody talks about.


Anna Rose [22:33] There's a couple teams doing that too. There's OpenPassport who are now Self, and their ZKPassport, and there was ZPass. I don't know if it's exactly the same, but there was a few teams that I know focused on the passports.


Lasha Antadze [22:45] Yeah. And then basically a year ago we put it out. We just showcased how cool it is that you can bring a passport. You don't have to rely on anyone else other than that you own this document, and then you can start proving all the attributes from it.


And we agree on the primitives, with all the builders and this identity pirates who are trying to figure out what is out there. But I think -- and I don't -- I mean where we diverge is in this, like okay, there's a registry and you can put everything out there. But where we diverge is this aspect that if you're building something truly decentralized, and if you want to empower individuals to get away from the plague of the governments and institutions, I think where we have forgotten in this place is the most important feature that started off this industry. 


Decentralization, in my opinion, happened -- Satoshi used decentralization to reach the one most valuable thing, to make a system censorship resistant. So what we see right now, the government's giving up. They're praising the Bitcoin technology.


I don't believe that they have this now, the revelation that, oh my God, we've done all these bad things out there, and we need to now correct this stuff. No. They're basically following this saying if you can't topple the revolution, you like co-opt it.


Anna Rose [24:19] You should join. Okay. Co-opt it. Okay.


Lasha Antadze [24:22] Yeah. And that's what happening with the Bitcoin and the blockchain. So the fact that these systems are censorship resistant, and they can't take them down, this is why we see now the sentiment change. And I believe with the identity, especially when we know that governments are exclusively today sitting on this regulation, standards, and stuff, we need to build the systems that can't be banned. And this is very important.


And I think this is what I'm trying to course correct and communicate with all the builders because, I mean, I love what others are doing, scanning different parts. But even the dependency on MPC networks, or this multiple nodes doing signatures, or trusted execution environments, we see that the governments and regulators go and make those companies, corporations not eligible to work in certain jurisdictions.


So what does it mean if I create my identity onchain through that service, and I attach it to my wallet, to my Bitcoin, to anything else, and they get banned, and they just withdraw from my jurisdiction, will I lose access? Or if I rely like with, I don't know, any corporation that has, I mean, DNA scandal, so 23andMe. So what happens? Like they promise all these privacy --


Anna Rose [25:53] And now they're selling their stack, they're selling all the data. It's so scary. People who've given it have no choice on where that goes after the fact, and not really any guarantees on it still being private. Yeah, that's scary.


Lasha Antadze [26:05] True. And I see the same pattern happening in identity systems. So apart from the registries, what we really push in is this client-side verification and attesting who you are. So in all the other frameworks, and why I say this is the most Satoshi framework that Rarimo does is that in all the other frameworks, you have an issuer and attester in an equation.


When you scan your passport, this data is somewhere sent, it's a server, secure server, privacy, whatever it is. It's processed, then returned and put down into a registry. Same happens with biometrics. You scan your face, all this stuff is processed somewhere and scanned. 


Anna Rose [26:51] But you're trying to say you're doing it client-side or would you do this -- you do the scanning client-side as well, and you keep it client-side?


Lasha Antadze [26:57] Yes.


Anna Rose [26:57] Okay.


Lasha Antadze [26:58] We do everything client-side. So entire our library of passports that we initially showcased and it was a lot of work, because country by country you had different signature schemes. You have even the data groups put in different places of the documents. So circuit by circuit, we had to build this client-side proving for every passport to work, and we reached 90% coverage.


Anna Rose [27:24] Nice.


Lasha Antadze [27:25] And then, we pushed this ideology that it does not matter. You take Rarilabs out, you take me out or take anything out. If a person is still on hold of the passport and document, or if still on hold of their face, or any aspect they're putting into this identity registry, they're not depending. And that is what will cause the shift in the industry, like the crypto did with the financial world.


Anna Rose [27:52] Interesting.


Lasha Antadze [27:54] And that's the ethos. And now Twitter has been going to go back to fundamentals, and that's what preaching. You know, go back to fundamentals, make system censorship resistant, take away the corporate control, any dependency, and even, it might take a couple of more seconds on client-side proving, but communicate something that is different.


Anna Rose [28:16] You sort of mentioned it's an L2. So it's an ID register as an L2 using ZKPs. I kind of want to understand how that plays out, because L2s traditionally do have centralizing points. So they'll have like a sequencer or the prover itself might be like a centralized point. If you're an L2, the way I understand an L2, how are you built different?


Lasha Antadze [28:39] So from an L2 perspective and sequencing perspective, yes, there is. But the fact that it's not a separate infra that is assisting into computation, or in terms of hash derivation or an output perspective.


Anna Rose [28:54] It's not a VM basically.


Lasha Antadze [28:55] Yeah. Output perspective.


Anna Rose [28:57] Okay.


Lasha Antadze [28:57] That removes the dependency. So even the sequencer might go down, but the tree, which is the registry, it's already pushed into Ethereum smart contract, and the network, and you can still continue using your identity or whatever is associated with it. So that's the reality.


So it's more like this kind of database in the form of a Merkle tree that is built up with all these root hashes and that gets pushed into L1. L2 exists because you can do an onchain verification at a lower cost, or you can even have an offchain module for verifying all those proofs.


Anna Rose [29:38] Is it a custom built L2, or is it based on any of the L2 frameworks that already exist?


Lasha Antadze [29:43] It's based on the Linea.


Anna Rose [29:45] On Linea. Oh, okay. Which is ZK. What are the ZKPs? Which ZK systems are you using?


Lasha Antadze [29:51] Oh, we use Circom. So we started out with Circom, Groth16, and the basic idea behind it was that we needed to generate client-side. So we had a lot of constraints in terms of the memory, in terms of the processing, and Groth16 was a match made in heaven from that perspective.


Anna Rose [30:11] I'm trying to picture those. So if you have client-side analysis of the document, and then, I guess, creation of the proof, what are you putting onchain exactly?


Lasha Antadze [30:21] It depends on the proof type. So for example, when you're processing -- let's go use case. For example, with the voting. So the idea is that you need your passport, and out of the passport, you need to prove three attributes.


One is your citizenship. Another one is the validity of the passport, age, and then you need somehow to prove uniqueness. So it's quite complex. Now you need to generate all these four proofs to cast a vote that is unique and verifiable. So what do you do?


You're using the client-side prover to generate that the data out of the passport, including the certificate and the keys that were included into the document is valid. So that's the proof and submitting to a smart contract. So this validity is verifiable.


And then you need to prove -- generate the proof of uniqueness based on the registry inclusion. So once you created the passport, the passport hash went into a uniqueness registry, and then you need to include into your proof the inclusion into this registry.


Anna Rose [31:43] The fact that -- the proof that it was included.


Lasha Antadze [31:46] So it was quite a challenge, because one of the biggest dilemmas into an identity space was that you couldn't have a fully decentralized setup, privacy at the same time, and proof of uniqueness by not being able to trace. So it's a kind of two sides of the coin. So what most of the teams are doing in terms of uniqueness proof, they're deriving this nullifier by an external hardware or an issuer or this instance.


Anna Rose [32:17] Like what? Like a TEE or you mean third party?


Lasha Antadze [32:19] Yeah. Like a TEE. Like a TEE or an issuer or someone needs to derive this nullifier, and then being able to check it.


In our case, we went a bit controversial. So we said, you can build passport hashes as a nullifiers onchain, which means that if somebody gets on hold of your passport, they can derive the same hash and understand that you're included in the registry.


But where we are losing this traceability aspect is that, this registry is shared by different use cases, applications and stuff. So even if somebody gets on hold of your passport, they derive the same hash, they understand that you are registered in the registry as a unique entity, but they'll never figure out what you came in here for. For airdrops, or for --


Anna Rose [33:07] Okay. This then is going a little bit into the voting, because you're trying to vote privately, and you don't want -- you don't even -- it sounds like you don't even necessarily want people to know that you have voted at all. And so, the only thing that's viewable from -- like if your credentials are obtained would be that you're included in this unique register.


Lasha Antadze [33:26] And you get this credible deniability that you came there for airdrops, or you came here to vote against Putin. And, actually, all these infrastructural decisions we made, it came from the use case. So the passports, when we introduced it, was not just the bare bones of now go find out how it could be used.


We went out and started building voting application. We were like -- that's how my mindset works. So whatever, there's this kind of technological breaks or something we're solving, I go out and like, oh, what does it break, or what does it enable that was not possible in a traditional sense. And voting was one of them.


So I was like, if you bring passports, suddenly you have a provable citizenship, and for the first time, you can run parallel elections that are out of the control of the state, but guarantee the verifiability that only certain citizens are voting.


So that became our biggest hit on the market because it got taken by Russian opposition, Georgian opposition. It became this kind of activist tool, and I guess it very crypto-centric. So this activism, and the freedom, and enabling something pays against oppressive practices.


Anna Rose [34:43] I want to get into the application side of things, in a minute. But I do just want to ask one more question on the tech itself, and that proving part, and also that decentralization question. So there's also been -- and we did an episode recently on this, on prover networks, and decentralizing the provers.


In this case, you have four proofs, you have an L2, you were saying the system is based on Linea, built in Circom with Groth16. And you sort of mentioned the sequencer, though, it sort of doesn't matter if it's centralized, but the prover itself -- is there a prover? I'm assuming, yes. And is it batching those four into one proof, or is it batching those four into the big register that's then creating one proof?


Lasha Antadze [35:28] Unfortunately, you have to do one by one. So you got this onchain --


Anna Rose [35:31] Oh, shit. Okay.


Lasha Antadze [35:31] Yeah. You have this onchain smart contract, but the proof sizes are optimized that way that you don't need to delegate the proving to an external instance. And here, basically, you can just launch a prover smart contract and directly verify on Ethereum.


Anna Rose [35:52] Is it the proof that's generated from your client? Is that why?


Lasha Antadze [35:54] Yes.


Anna Rose [35:55] This client-side -- like you create your own proof, so there's no joint proof. Okay. So can you talk about the verification contract? What is that? What does it do exactly?


Lasha Antadze [36:06] Once again, it depends on the logic of what you're trying to prove.


Anna Rose [36:11] I see. Oh yeah. So it would be like the voting application would have an onchain verifier.


Lasha Antadze [36:16] Yes.


Anna Rose [36:16] Okay. Okay. Got it.


Lasha Antadze [36:17] So now this verification smart contract that we put out as an open source thing to be reused in a voting case is checking the validity. It as well checks the proof of inclusion into a registry from a uniqueness perspective. And that's it.


In case, so for example, now we're working on this next frontier of optimization, which is putting biometric face on client-side. No one has done it. We just demoed it two weeks ago, where you are able to use your phone and camera on your device to take an image, generate the vectoral features out of your face, and then, being able to process and generate the proof locally, and make it verifiable onchain.


Why that's needed? So for example, if we want to understand that you're a real human, I think it's pretty handy. So imagine you're going to embed into an experience, like an airdrops. So you don't have to switch between the apps. Now prove your humanhood or -- no, it's embedded into the flow. You just give a permission for camera to look at you, it takes your vector face features, it compares on the pre-trained model of how does a human should look like. Plus for example, generate a challenge, turn your head here and there.


Anna Rose [37:46] Yeah, yeah.


Lasha Antadze [37:47] Then generate the proof that all this work has been done correctly, and submit it into a smart contract and off you go. And I think that's the future.


No. Because of like, oh, it's safe and private. No. This is how do we go ahead of the regulators, all these friction points. Because if you process this data -- and I think it's unfair that, for example, European Union went after Worldcoin, who is using all these privacy-preserving technologies, and they're blaming him of not being compliant to GDPR and stuff.


Anna Rose [38:23] EU privacy.


Lasha Antadze [38:24] I can understand any other argument against them. But telling that someone who's collecting the copies of your face and documents are compliant with GDPR, and someone who's just generating zero-knowledge proofs, or creating a hash, one-way hash out of this information is in violation, and that's what backlash is. So then they go after this company, and they say you can't work into this jurisdiction.


But if we bring all that on the client-side, it's no server dependent, no application dependent, it's embedded into your own device, then system has this kind of freeze, because you don't understand how to fight, no with regulation, no with coercion because you can't go after servers and stuff.


Anna Rose [39:15] I mean, there's no data being held anywhere. So there's no one for regulators to say, oh you have all this data. But could it run into the same issue then that Worldcoin did though? Like even though it's not fair that they're only doing hash one-way, ZKP -- one-way proofs. But I mean, if they're going after them, would they potentially come after something like this?


Lasha Antadze [39:37] The thing is that we did a lot of due diligence of this legal case.


Anna Rose [39:43] Yeah, yeah.


Lasha Antadze [39:43] And the fact that -- I mean, it's like, we still have to see that fight unfolding. But what they go after was this MPC network. So the fact that you're storing a hash and this library into an MPC network that is controlled, or is into contractual agreement with you, that's what keeps you into a data collector role.


Anna Rose [40:10] For anyone who's not aware of the Worldcoin example, they have this Orb that scans your eye. I'm not a fan, have never been a fan, have spoken about it here that I'm not a fan. I think it's super dystopian.


But what they do is they scan your iris and then create a hash or -- and a ZKP somewhere along the line, that you're a person and that you're not a bot, basically. I think the one thing that's proving is just you're a real person. That's the only thing as far as I understand.


But because the -- I mean, what I've understood too is because the hardware, this Orb, it's proprietary, it's not open source, and therefore, it isn't really investigatable, and it's not really checkable. And there's reasons that it's like that. I've spoken a bit with the team. But I think that's where they also have a bit of an issue.


What you're talking about is it would be on your device. It is using though, I'm assuming like the Apple, or any sort of smartphone face-scanning technology.


Lasha Antadze [41:06] Just the camera.


Anna Rose [41:07] Oh, really. Okay. So you're not actually tapping into any of their tools 


Lasha Antadze [41:13] No. Just the camera. So yes, of course, there's this kind of problem with dependency on the device manufacturer, but I mean, we can't get away from it in the realms.


Anna Rose [41:21] We do have digital cameras, but not really, not enough anymore. I think really the phone is the camera, so.


Lasha Antadze [41:28] But overall, the entry barrier and distribution that can use any camera to attest and generate the proof or an output hash in the same manner, and this algorithm -- and this kind of whatever we're working on is available, so you can launch it yourself. This is the ethos.


This is what the Bitcoin is about. This is what the crypto is about. So I don't depend on wallet provider, app provider. I don't depend on anything. If the script runs correctly, and I know the 12 phrases, I can get access. And the same on the identity aspect. So not try to build institutionalized dependent on any setup, but empower client-side, individual users and be fluid, so no one can take it out.


Anna Rose [42:20] In the case of the biometric though, do you also have to do sort of that, what is it, uniqueness check? Or is this mostly just a liveness check?


Lasha Antadze [42:28] It has this, I would say, phases of development. So in a way, we are now the first team who has ever put the face biometric and this neural network stuff on a device level. At first, when we started, I thought it would take us about 3 to 5 years, but the fact that we started even rewriting the neural vector models available, trying to make it verifiable cryptographically, optimized to be put into a ZKP, that was the biggest kind of -- not innovation, but this kind of new dimension we opened up.


When you talk about what you can do with that model, yes, now you can prove the liveness. So this is, here you go, all the builders are, come, you can build an alternative to Worldcoin in a democratized version that can prove your liveness and humanhood without downloading or doing anything special and dependency on hardware.


But as the model improves, and as well the hardware improves, you can reach the certain uniqueness thresholds. For now, benchmarking wise that we measured, we're at the 85%. So there are use cases, such as liveness, that could work. There are certain use cases with this uniqueness or access control that you could use with some additional factors of authentication and that could work as well.


Anna Rose [44:06] But wouldn't you run into the issue of if you have to prove the uniqueness, don't you have to send it off client? Or can you prove it's unique already on the device itself?


Lasha Antadze [44:17] Oh, that's the thing. So if you want to prove uniqueness, once again we run into this dilemma. of how do we build this nullifier registries, and are they onchain? We're still thinking, but basically what we're like exploring right now is this kind of fuzzy extractors. What does it mean?


So you can put a different image, so my face for example. And from image to image, you might have some deviation in terms of lighting or in terms of face features, but it enables you that within this certain threshold, still being able to derive the same hash. It's the frontier we're exploring.


What does it mean? Does that mean that we might have a registry that puts the hashes of your face onchain? Could be a pass. Do people want to do that? Most probably not. Or we might see. But in a way, the fact that -- unfortunately, reality is such that people -- I mean, you can derive this image based on any photo. And now all these photos are available.


So does put in a hash without a salt and the blinder to guarantee uniqueness is an ethical or a working scalable solution. That's something we're discussing in general.


Anna Rose [45:42] I almost wonder if you make it fuzzy, though, doesn't it end up with the possibility of collisions?


Lasha Antadze [45:47] Well, it does. But from a product perspective, where I would take it, it's not like, don't follow the path of a standard identity solution. So don't go into KYC building uniqueness guarantee from like access to your bank account.


Anna Rose [46:03] Use it for other things.


Lasha Antadze [46:03] So use it for other things. Use it for identity. For example, use it for the AI stuff. Why not? So for example, why not build a registry where you can exclude or input the certain rules about reusing your face, which is now a jungle. So imagine any person with an any AI model, owned by corporations, can put on your picture and generate fakes, deep fakes, different stuff. So what if we use this technology, not --


Anna Rose [46:36] To prove it's you.


Lasha Antadze [46:38] To prove it's me, and don't give permission to generate certain things. And also, a bit like twisting, that's what I say. My mind always goes like, what are the new type of use cases? Or this kind of paradigms we can shift, have very basic stuff, such as your biometric, but enabled into a new use case that is not like, even if somebody's able to derive a hash, and understand that that's your hash, it's not really threatening all your value or everything, but it doesn't make sense.


Anna Rose [47:11] Interesting. I mean, I see a bit of a -- I see your thinking here where it's like you have worked on the side of with the governments, with the authorities, with the institutions that are like, let's use cool tech to do what we already do. And this is where you've seen the slowness, maybe some mixed incentives, some compromises that have unintended consequences.


And what you're describing is like, well, let's not go for the KYC and the more sensitive stuff. Let's go for the less sensitive stuff because then you get the tech out there and used, which is good.


Lasha Antadze [47:45] Yeah. And it does not require -- no this kind of regulatory fight terminal. And it does not really bring back this fear in terms of people losing privacy or something that is painfully fragile. And try to evolve this technology, and put out these tools out on the market as soon as possible. So builders are creative into redesigning how do we manage, and how do we use our identity.


And that's why I said like scanning a face -- I mean, I would not scan my face for, I don't know, getting a token, for example. Or I would not do it for -- I don't know, scan my eye. Because it's really, it's a bit dystopian stuff. But if doing this thing is not attached to all the sentiments, it's not attached to all that stuff, but it's basically --


Anna Rose [48:42] And if it's actually staying on your device in general.


Lasha Antadze [48:45] Yeah. And it's part of my rules, my identity rules that I set to the emerging ecosystem, then I think it's fine.


Anna Rose [48:55] Let's talk about those applications now. So I think you've already mentioned one which was this alternative voting. Maybe we should explore what that was or is. What does that actually entail? How are people using the tool you have today for such a thing?


Lasha Antadze [49:09] Yeah. So voting, I think, it was a great demonstration of the both technology and the mindset and the philosophy we -- I think, sometimes we need to revive in the industry, because it was just focusing on a problem of individual free speech and society that actually suffer from not being able to, not just to vote, but even like to show dissent.


And the countries that actually we found the product market fit, such as Russia or Iran as well and Georgia, these are like systems, the government systems that does not allow not just to vote, but even the oppositioner to be on the ballot. So when people were telling me the traditional voting systems are so superior, I'm saying that's not what we're trying to replace.


Anna Rose [50:09] Okay.


Lasha Antadze [50:10] What we're trying to tackle is when you don't have any medium, even the social network where you could put out the dissent, what do you do? And that's what this entire -- we labeled is a freedomtool.org, which is open source. It's this kind of public good we put out. So this is a tool that shows how you can vampire attack the digital passport infrastructure that is all around the world, and use it into an application that shows dissent. So in Russia that was the first use case that was used.


Anna Rose [50:47] What is it? Do you want to explain what it is exactly?


Lasha Antadze [50:50] It's a voting app.


Anna Rose [50:51] So it's a voting app that isn't the official voting app, and people can just download it on their phone, I guess. Maybe just explain how people used it.


Lasha Antadze [51:00] So it was an app built by a Russian oppositioner, an ex Pussy Riot lawyer. And this app was in parallel to a presidential elections. And this app was more like this protest. It was not like -- they were not making a decision who to vote. It was more like showing dissent that I don't trust this thing, and there is this alternative voice but we're not given a platform.


So all these applications of voting, for me, it's more this kind of spaces to show dissent. And then technology basically funnels and guarantees that while you're using your passport, by tapping your passport to a mobile phone, generating those proofs locally, and then basically sending this anonymous vote of dissent into a blockchain, so nothing is traceable, and no one can understand where this vote came from.


And that was this kind of demo set, like what happened? So once this app was out and people started downloading, Kremlin issued direct letter to Apple to take the application down. So first app, it got blocked. But once again as this system is not app dependent, what happened is that other applications were popping up, and it was distributed. On Android, you don't even need an approval of Google because people can download the packets. And that's how the thing was spread.


And suddenly, there was a paradigm for the first time when you had a mobile phone as a ballot box, where people could just take the biometric passports that they own, tap it on, no data leaves the device, the proof is generated locally, and then you're granted ability to vote, or say what you have to say. And that's powerful, and that's something we need to focus on.


So I think that's what makes people excited. That's what differentiates us as a space from everything out there. And that's why I'm a bit allergic to all this KYC, and try to put into regulations because we got so much opportunities.


Anna Rose [53:21] Interesting. I mean, that particular case, when I think about it, it does sort of read as a bit of an art project or a example, because you'd still be -- like if you think of who could use that at that point, you need very motivated people, very technical -- well, maybe not super technical, but technical enough to know exactly what is happening, and to trust it, I feel. Because the average person, if you say to them, oh, there's this cool cryptography and I promise it's private, it's hard for them to verify that. But it's still really an interesting edge case.


Lasha Antadze [53:55] That's a really good question because if we interpret that, that means how do we build trust with the regular people while we know that explaining from a mass perspective and cryptography perspective, it does not really correlate. So it's like I don't know, trust it. So you can't really build that trust. So I guess this trust anchor in this, our use cases, was itself a person, the politician who put out this application.


So it was like this double trust building. First, this guy finding us, building a trust with me, our team, believing in what we're building, explaining all these risks and this kind of friction points we might alongside do, and then this person taking all these risks, taking out to the market, and building this trust directly to his audience. That's why it worked. It worked in a capacity that like, okay, it had like 40,000 voters.


Anna Rose [55:06] And most of them probably his fans. But, I guess, it was signaling that there were his fans, that his fans existed.


Lasha Antadze [55:13] Yeah. And that's how I believe that trust building really happens in real world. And cryptography just guarantees that there won't be a deviation if something changes. So unfortunately, it's like two different things we need to build in parallel.


Anna Rose [55:31] Yeah. One is the cryptography that is very strong, and the other is the trust in the cryptography being very strong. Very much what it says it is. So let's explore some additional applications that you've already sort of mentioned. You did mention the one where there's facial recognition biometric. But why don't we keep going with different applications for Rarimo?


Lasha Antadze [55:53] I'm actually exploring and more now excited into where do we bring now this biometric aspect. Or verall, if you zoom out tech-wise, what we really build is this image recognition capabilities being provable in zero knowledge proofs and --


Anna Rose [56:15] Client side.


Lasha Antadze [56:16] Client-side, and being verifiable onchain. So this is technical breakthrough that we open up. So, for me, it's now this kind of new blue ocean. So that means --


Anna Rose [56:27] What can you do with it?


Lasha Antadze [56:29] Yeah. That means that I can process any image using any camera and make it verifiable onchain. And we think like, what does it uncover? So for example, account recovery, we demoed it -- I demoed it a couple of weeks ago in Denver, where I showcased what you can do with this tech. But what I'm trying to push once again is like, don't associate your face with the keys, because someone can take a photo of you, derive the same stuff with all this precision stuff, and you might get wrecked.


So I want to give this creativity that what if it's not the face but a page in the book, that is not like the characters, but actually this image processing. So only you know -- it's more like a proof of knowledge through the image recognition. So imagine it's like the Harry Potter brought in life. You can put different objects, items, images, certain things that you know, and they could serve as your piece.


Anna Rose [57:37] It's like a password. Like an object password. That's cool.


Lasha Antadze [57:42] Yeah. And that's what I'm trying to do. So lots of people come to us, and they're like, oh, now account abstraction is coming, and there's going to be this driving narrative. No more seed phrases. Now we can do this and that. But that's where my mind goes, like we're building this sovereign money owned by the humans, and now we're introducing an account abstraction to plug in a corporate identity services that control me. Like they can be banned, they could go off the business. It doesn't really align. So trying to push this creativity.


Anna Rose [58:14] Oh, I like that idea. But just I'm sort of stuck on that. So the account abstraction, the ability to recover, or account recovery basically, I mean, this is actually just making me think like seed phrases. We've, in our world, become really familiar with them, really comfortable using them, sort of understand them. But why are we dealing with seed phrases when we could be doing a lot more interesting things there. Especially when you're playing with client-side proving.


Lasha Antadze [58:41] Yeah. And there's only you, your camera, and whatever you want to use it as a password.


Anna Rose [58:48] Interesting.


Lasha Antadze [58:48] And it can unlock a lot of things. So I know you can build a game, you can build all this -- I mean, it's like bringing now this physical dimension in a cryptography.


So it's so fresh, even internally, with us that we have this kind of the brainstorming sessions of understand like, oh my God, you could do this, and you can do that. But what I personally are stressing myself to figure out was, is that like, okay, now we have this AI stuff. So what is the problem? What is this thing? So these exclusion registries. So that's how this idea now brewing internally came up.


So what if you could build an exclusion registry of yourself based on the certain aspects that you own. For example, being able to tell that no one is able -- no AI model should be able to generate the fake of my passport. Or if somebody is using to generate the certain attributes that belong to me, I get at least a notification, and somehow try to build this ethical and collaborative relationship between these AI models, all these companies building in it, and individuals through this identity.


Because once again, when we talk about the deep fakes and for example, somebody not using my face to, I don't know, fabricate anything else, I don't see based on my experience, any government incentives, or collaborating on this regulating and understanding what's permitted, what's not. So they would just go out and they just slash, and they say it's banned, like they did with ChatGPT in certain jurisdictions.


So wherever there is this complexity of coordination at a larger scale, governments always fail. So you end up with banning a service and not developing. Corporations, I don't think that people are willing to give all these rules and the identities and stuff, and even like IP rights to the corporations. And now then this OpenAI being this bearer of the data, set up of the rules, and then internalizing this entire thing, and making it to work at scale. I don't think that way as well. 


So what I'm thinking is maybe now there's this horizontal collaborative way where individually we can define the rules. We provide this canvas for individuals in terms of ownership or even the terms. For example, if you're a model and you want your certain photos or certain things reused, and AI generated and extended included into campaigns, why not set the rules onchain, and then push it as an incentive for this global coordination.


But other than that, a lot of interesting stuff that builders can come up with.


Anna Rose [01:01:40] Some of what you are sharing sounds a little bit like the applications that I've heard from the Cursive team and from the ZK Email team. I feel like there's this whole class of application focused programmable cryptography. I'm going to make the umbrella term the loyal ZK. It's not only ZK often. It's like all sorts of different cryptography systems. But where people are -- they've created these really cool tools, and then there's this green field of ways to use them. And some applications will probably end up not working in reality because maybe it's not concise enough or secure enough or something, but there's a lot of these softer cases where they might.


Lasha Antadze [01:02:18] Yep.


Anna Rose [01:02:19] I think there's also -- you could throw in the TLS folks who are playing with web-related things, and I think it's like this really interesting group of thinkers, and I would place Rarimo in there as well. I mean I think Sismo, with the team we just mentioned, was also in that category when they were live back in, what was it, 2022, 2023.


And I love meeting kind of teams that are working in that direction, where you're creating ways that we're getting so much closer to the application developers actually being able to use something to start experimenting. And it's not about building -- like you're using existing Circom, Groth16, Linea. So you're not having to build that part of the stack. You're not building that infrastructure. You're building sort of these protocols almost like paradigms, libraries, I guess, that it's right under the application itself.


Lasha Antadze [01:03:12] True. Because I don't want to get locked in, as mentioned, into this cycle. While in governments and corporations there's this a cycle of paperwork and bureaucracy and people writing the regulation for 5 years, and then understanding that it does not work.


I think that overall IT space has the same tendency of rebuilding and doing a lot of long work onto bits and pieces of technological incremental improvements. But at the end of the day, when reality hits, you're not able to really plug that in into something valuable.


Anna Rose [01:03:49] Well, sometimes it just takes too long, you might miss the moment because you've built everything from the ground up, potentially.


Lasha Antadze [01:03:55] True.


Anna Rose [01:03:55] There's so many examples too of teams that came out with an application first, and then had to go backwards, and build the tech stack because it didn't exist. So it was like I want to -- I mean, I'd use maybe Dark Forest as an example. Like we're building a game, they built a game, it had limitations. And then the team doing that almost went backwards and started to be like, oh, we need more efficient ZKPs, and they started a lot of Halo 2 workshops.


And it's like that group ended up becoming more of an infrastructure builder, because it had to at the time. But I think today, because a lot of that infrastructure has been built, not only on the Halo 2 stack, but all sorts of kind of systems, there are now teams like yours that can come in and use at least some of it out of the box in a trustful way.


Lasha Antadze [01:04:41] True. And they somehow connect these dots, and try to understand where certain things make sense. Sort of the technical challenge. It's exactly this productization, go-to-market channel, where it takes off, and unfortunately, as we don't know the frontier or we don't know these aspects, we usually revert to this. Not the apps, but more like these use cases. Oh, you can prove this and that, but the rationale never goes beyond that. Like, and so what? What kind of flywheel does it create? What will be the distribution like?


And when aligning all these figures on the chessboard and trying to then navigate, that's where the hardest part happens. But I will be like on a positive note, and I'd say, over time through all these iterations, the crypto as a financial rails and overall this kind of new paradigm into this world did find its feet and --


Anna Rose [01:05:47] A bit of a product market fit. Sometimes we debate that, whether it's fully found -- I mean stablecoins.


Lasha Antadze [01:05:53] We can -- I mean, we cannot talk about stablecoins, but I think the foundation of the stablecoins, we can consider it as the kind of first step into an algorithmic stablecoins which I think are the next frontier. So the value that the pricing and stability is important in crypto now everybody understands, so how then we transfer that into something more revolutionary, and I think, it will unlock this next phase.


With identity, we're a bit in this behind --


Anna Rose [01:06:24] Behind.


Lasha Antadze [01:06:24] And making these first steps because first, we need to define everything we can do differently. Then out of this different wise, understanding where can we apply to run these feedback loops from an industry, and then understand how to productize and create this flywheel that feeds the registries, that is serving this client-side provers into different applications, and there are then builders coming, reinventing all these experiences.


Anna Rose [01:07:00] Cool. Lasha, thank you so much for the chat. We got a chance to explore identity. I have explored it before on the show, but I think this is a big refresh on the topic, bringing us a little bit up to date into -- I mean, into how you're thinking about it, but also how the market has evolved, new paradigms that have emerged that make us think differently about how to even create identities. It's been a lot of fun.


Lasha Antadze [01:07:23] Thank you, Anna, for having me. And the fact that we went from this prehistoric identity to what are the frontiers and opportunities that are unfolding in front of us. I hope it was interesting for the listener and happy to jam on those things anytime.


Anna Rose [01:07:41] Nice. Thanks for that. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Henrik, Rachel and Tanya. And to our listeners, thanks for listening.