[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 1:39)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, I chat with Théo and Mike from ZKPassport and Obsidion. We cover how Théo cut his teeth on ZK tech at our very own ZK Hack Hackathon series. We cover Mike's journey from early Bitcoin days to MakerDAO to be working on ZKPassport and zkID system, how the two of them joined forces, their longstanding work with and on the Noir zkDSL, what differentiates ZKPassport from other zkID projects, their goals with the Obsidion project, and more.


Now before we kick off, I just want to make sure you're following our release of the ZK Whiteboard Sessions Season 3. These videos, produced by ZK Hack and supported by Bain Capital Crypto, feature our hosts Nico and Guillermo exploring the building blocks of the ZK systems we know and love.


We are currently releasing one module every two weeks. These can be found over on the Zero Knowledge Podcast YouTube channel. Subscribe there to be reminded, and we'll be adding the link to the show notes.


Now here is my interview with Théo and Mike from ZKPassport.


Today I'm here with Théo and Mike from ZKPassport and Obsidion.


Welcome to the show, Théo and Mike.


[Michael Elliot] (1:39 - 1:41)
Hi everyone. Thank you for having us, Anna.


[Théo Madzou] (1:41 - 1:45)
Yeah. Thanks, Anna. Long time listener, so I'm really excited about the episode.


[Anna Rose] (1:45 - 3:15)
Oh, nice. Okay, so this episode we're going to be talking about ZKPassport, which I feel is in the category of zkID. We've actually been doing this ongoing series with a number of different projects focused on this. We'll add links to these in the show notes, and I know we're going to be mentioning them throughout.


You also have been building Obsidion. For me, this is something I want to kind of dig into and understand a little better what it is.


But before we do this, I actually wanted to spend a bit of time talking about ZK Hack and the ZK Hack Hackathon specifically, because Théo, you're like the champion of ZK Hack Hackathons. You've won prizes at least in 4 out of the 5 hackathons.


And that 5th one, you were a judge. So you weren't allowed. You weren't eligible. Basically, you've just like kind of been cleaning up. So I want to talk a little bit about that story, ZK Hack, how you've been involved.


And then Mike, I also remember meeting you at ZK Kraków, and I think the two of you actually worked on a project together. So I feel like the story of ZKPassport is a little bit intertwined with that ZK Hack story.


And also, I feel like I've seen ZKPassport evolve over the last two years. So I'm excited to have you on to share more. 


But yeah, Théo, let's start with your story, kind of what were you working on before? How did you get involved in ZK? I know you from ZK Hack Lisbon, where I was the judge at the time when you're presenting your project, which ended up winning Hackers' Choice in that first hackathon.


So tell me a little bit about what got you started, what you were working on.


[Théo Madzou] (3:16 - 3:45)
So ZK Hack Lisbon was actually the first time I interacted with ZK on a practical base, where I truly did my first circuit. Before that, I started to learn a bit about it, research a bit, probably 4 or 5 months prior. But ZK Hack was truly when I got into it.


So originally, I got into Web3 before I got into ZK, so late 2021, did a bunch of smart contracts, was into NFT for some time, I actually didn't buy any, I was just writing smart contracts for NFTs.


[Anna Rose] (3:46 - 3:48)
Maybe that was a good thing. Yeah.


[Théo Madzou] (3:49 - 4:54)
Yeah. I wasn't too much into this art style and whatever, so just writing it. That's it. After some point, I wanted to find something with a bit more meaning, something more interested.


I stumbled upon ZK. First it was more about scalability, because that's what people were focused on at the time. I was actually more interested in the privacy aspect.


So I digged into it and slightly starting to get more and more knowledge on the matter. But kind of in the background, as I had free time.


And eventually I went to ETH Porto. So that was, I think, 2023, March or February, I can't remember the date exactly. And I met, at a side event, a random guy that told me about ZK Hack and had never heard about it before.


I was like, oh, that actually sounds interesting. And the next day I went on the website and signed up, went back to Lisbon, and I went to ZK Hack Lisbon. So that was an interesting experience.


This is very interesting, because just because of that one guy, I learned about it. And if I didn't meet him, things would have probably gone very differently for me.


[Anna Rose] (4:54 - 5:00)
Maybe you wouldn't have been in ZK as soon. It sounds like you were kind of headed towards ZK anyways.


[Théo Madzou] (5:00 - 5:02)
Yeah. It's just a matter of timing.


[Anna Rose] (5:04 - 5:17)
Okay. Yeah. And that first event was in, I think it was end of March, 2023. So that's ZK Hack Lisbon, our first hackathon that we did, which was very exciting. Great memory of that.


And you guys, you won a prize.


[Théo Madzou] (5:18 - 5:32)
Yeah. I won a prize with Gayrold, who worked at ZK Hack for some time and now moved to Miden. So we had this nice idea of Fruity Friends, which was like a cool project to hack on for the first time. Good story.


[Anna Rose] (5:32 - 5:41)
What was it again? It was set matching or something. It was using ZK to match up people who liked the same fruit, I think was what it was about or something, right?


[Théo Madzou] (5:42 - 6:01)
It started from a desire to kind of match with people who were sharing your deepest kind of shameful interest. So we wanted to wrap it in some nice way that wouldn't be so explicit. So fruits was definitely the way to go.


[Anna Rose] (6:02 - 6:08)
I feel like that's a theme of your projects. It's like dark intention wrapped in colourful cartoon.


[Théo Madzou] (06:08 - 06:09)
Yes. 


[Anna Rose] (6:09 - 6:24)
We'll get to that. Yeah.


You actually won at ZK Hack Lisbon, Hacker's Choice. Gaylord, who we just actually recently had on the show too, is now at Miden, but he ended up joining the ZK Hack team. But you went on to do all sorts of other hackathons.


[Théo Madzou] (6:25 - 6:34)
I did the ZK Hack Istanbul. At the time, Gaylord already joined ZK Hack. So he was one of the judges.


Well, he was not part of my judging team, but he was one of the judges at the time. So he could not --


[Anna Rose] (06:34- 6:34)
He was not your judge.


[Théo Madzou] (6:34- 6:39)
No. He was not my judge. Conflict of interest. So let's not do that.


[Anna Rose] (6:39 - 6:42)
Good. That's important. Yeah. We made sure.


[Théo Madzou] (6:43 - 7:26)
So he couldn't help me, unfortunately. I was originally looking for a team, but I couldn't find one. At least I couldn't find one with an idea that I liked, that would be doable within the two days of the hackathon.


So I ended up doing it on my own. And the reasoning was, as some people may know, there's a lot of cats in Istanbul. So I was like, I should do something around cats.


And I also want to try something different. I want to try new technology. So I went on for like o1Labs technology, like o1js. I wanted to try it because it felt interesting. JavaScript for zero knowledge felt like an interesting approach. I needed to try it.


I was like, cats, o1js, what can I do? Voting. Voting for your favourite cat.


[Anna Rose] (7:26 - 7:30)
Cool. You just mentioned o1js, but what were you using on the ZK Hack Lisbon?


[Théo Madzou] (7:30 - 7:42)
Oh, yes. I forgot to mention. So in ZK Hack Lisbon, I actually used Noir. And this was my very first interaction with the ZK, like a first DSL. So that was the first time. And that was straight with Noir.


[Anna Rose] (7:42 - 7:53)
Yeah. Yeah. This is exciting because later on, I mean, you guys end up working more and more on Noir. So you did Noir on the first one, and then snarkyjs on the second one. The Mina language.


[Théo Madzou] (7:54 - 7:54)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (7:54 - 7:54)
Cool.


[Théo Madzou] (7:55 - 7:58)
That was, I wanted a bit of a change, try different things.


[Anna Rose] (7:58 - 8:05)
Nice. Moving on to Kraków though. I think this is where like Mike, you and Théo work together on a project. Am I right?


[Théo Madzou] (8:06 - 8:30)
Yes. I did feel like ZK Hack Kraków was the combination of it all. It's really the project that it was very nice narratives, very good idea, and we really pushed it to its funniest embodiment in some sort.


So I think if I remember correctly, I was like, Michael, you kind of came in last minute. You decided to fly in from London.


[Michael Elliot] (8:30 - 8:42)
Yeah. I was in London at the time. And I thought, oh, Kraków is just a few hour flight away. And so I just started to do that over the weekend. I think we spoke about it in advance actually, like we could work on this project, smash it out.


[Théo Madzou] (8:43 - 8:55)
At that time, we were already starting, both Michael and I, separate project at the time on Passport. And then we had some tools that we could use already to build some app that could be shown like what we ended up building.


[Michael Elliot] (8:55 - 8:57)
Slowly converging --


[Théo Madzou] (8:57 - 8:58)
Slowly converging.


[Michael Elliot] (8:58 - 9:00)
These projects at the time. It was a gradual kind of organic thing.


[Théo Madzou] (9:00 - 9:36)
So I was like, time is ripe now to use it in an actual hackathons and show what we can do. I was doing the HackHouse, I think, organised by Gaylord right before the hackathon.


So I had time to think of some of the ideas. And I was like, I should do something around this.


I ended up thinking about another idea around airdrops. But then Gaylord kind of pushed me towards more like age verification and then the kind of idea to make a good story around it, so what we could do.


And then the idea of I did fruits before. So that was time to go for a vegetable. So and here comes --


[Michael Elliot] (9:36 - 9:37)
And corn.


[Théo Madzou] (9:37 - 9:39)
And here comes the corn. Yes.


[Michael Elliot] (9:39 - 9:43)
Age verification, CornHub. It was perfect.


[Anna Rose] (9:44 - 9:48)
Very good. But it's age verification, which is actually like so...


[Michael Elliot] (9:48 - 9:48)
Super topical, right?


[Anna Rose] (9:48 - 9:51)
Yeah. It's so relevant now. That's so cool.


[Michael Elliot] (9:51 - 10:01)
I remember also, because the judging is a big part of it, I think the story you can tell. ChatGPT was just coming out at the time. And so we use it to generate a lot of really, really fun looking kind of edgy corn --


[Anna Rose] (10:01 - 10:02)
Quite innocent.


[Michael Elliot] (10:02 - 10:22)
Innocent corn content.


And also recall, you had a t-shirt painting session going on. And so I was like, Théo, I'll be right back. I just want to get some custom merch done.


And so I went in there, and I painted out the CornHub logo. It turned out quite nicely. And then so when we presented, Théo wore this CornHub shirt.


[Théo Madzou] (10:22 - 10:22)
Yep.


[Michael Elliot] (10:23 - 10:23)
It was a hit.


[Anna Rose] (10:25 - 10:28)
Okay. Then moving on, Montreal. And then we should get to ZKPassport, by the way.


[Michael Elliot] (10:28 - 10:29)
Eventually.


[Anna Rose] (10:29 - 10:53)
I don't know if we want to spend the entire episode on ZK Hack. So Théo, why don't we speed ZK Montreal, ZK Hack Montreal? That was the last time you were a hacker.


Oh, yeah, I should mention to anyone listening, it's like you didn't always win first place. You won a prize throughout. But you were just this kind of -- yeah, you had this really funny arc of just constantly getting into the top three, which was great.


[Théo Madzou] (10:53 - 11:02)
Yeah. We got general prizes all the time. So sometime Hacker's Choice, Istanbul I was like in the top -- I think that was top five.


[Anna Rose] (11:02 - 11:02)
True, true.


[Théo Madzou] (11:02 - 11:12)
Like most ZK Hack actually top three, but this one, as I remember, you were having some issue choosing the project. So you kind of made it top five instead of top three.


[Anna Rose] (11:12 - 11:12)
This is Istanbul?


[Théo Madzou] (11:12 - 11:13)
Yeah, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (11:13 - 11:13)
Yeah, yeah.


[Michael Elliot] (11:14 - 11:15)
Yeah. And the others were like...


[Michael Elliot] (11:15 - 11:19)
We kind of cleaned up in Kraków too, right? We won like seven different prizes.


[Théo Madzou] (11:19 - 11:20)
Oh, yeah, so like --


[Anna Rose] (11:21 - 11:21)
No, no.


[Michael Elliot] (11:21 - 11:22)
That's got to be a record.


[Théo Madzou] (11:22 - 11:23)
Yeah, Kraków --


[Anna Rose] (11:23 - 11:24)
I think you got all the bounties, right?


[Théo Madzou] (11:24 - 11:43)
So we got like the Hacker's Choice, but then a lot of bounties in Kraków. That was interesting.


So Montreal, ZK Montreal, the Hackathon, this time I was in a bigger team. I was actually with someone that actually currently works at Self now, Remy. So we hacked together and some other people.


[Anna Rose] (11:43 - 11:44)
Oh, that's cool.


[Théo Madzou] (11:44 - 11:57)
This project was more around proving your location using Galileo system that signs the metadata. It doesn't actually prove -- full prove your location, but does give you some element of greater guarantee.


[Anna Rose] (11:57 - 12:00)
And Koen from the ZKV team was also on your team. I remember you had a great team.


[Théo Madzou] (12:00 - 12:01)
We had Koen.


[Anna Rose] (12:01 - 12:03)
Yeah. All stars.


[Théo Madzou] (12:03 - 12:28)
Yeah. So yeah, it was a team of four. We had like... No, we were supposed to have like a fifth member, but that was... I think they dropped off before the hackathon finished. And that project, that was interesting.


The other interesting element of the hackathon was the blackout. So we had to move venues. There was a storm, right? So the current went off a few times. And so they can --


[Anna Rose] (12:29 - 13:06)
We lost power on the first day of the Hackathon and needed to move location. It was the most intense event we've ever thrown as a team. Moving 150 hackers from -- like across a city where -- moving tables, moving banners, moving prizes, like all of it. Setting up a new stage. And then we did it.


Yeah, it was pretty intense. But the team was amazing, and the hackers were so patient, which was amazing too. You guys just came over.


Both venues were beautiful. So it was kind of like -- I think for anyone who was there, the memory is very vivid.


[Théo Madzou] (13:06 - 14:03)
On this project, we had to push through a little bit more. So we went a bit more deep into the night. Usually I never like, I always sleep during hackathon. So I always take the night to sleep at least a bit. So I never do full night without sleep. But we had to go a bit later.


And the next day we submitted. And after that being quite tired, so we went through the judging, and after the judging, we kind of went out a bit.


So I remember we went out, we had a drink. And then while we having the drink, we learning that we actually are part of the finalists. It was like, oh, so we need to come back to the venue because we're going to need to present on the main stage after like having one beer.


So that was an interesting experience going on the stage, present and, again, being part of the finalists.


In summary, so I got two finalists prize, Istanbul and Montreal. And I did two others with a Hacker's Choice in Lisbon and Kraków.


[Anna Rose] (14:03 - 14:15)
Cool. And then Théo, I know that you were also a judge at ZK Hack Berlin, but I want to hear from Mike a little bit of his backstory and maybe where this idea for ZKPassport starts.


Mike, what were you working on before?


[Michael Elliot] (14:15 - 14:23)
Yeah. So I first discovered Bitcoin in 2011. Created this fun little Windows desktop widget using the _____________________ Matrox API.


[Anna Rose] (14:23 - 14:24)
Yeah.


[Michael Elliot] (14:24 - 14:35)
Called posting that to the Bitcointalk forums. Got into solo mining.


With my desktop, I managed to mine a Bitcoin block. That was fun. I think the block reward was like 50 at that time still. So rhat was --


[Anna Rose] (14:35 - 14:36)
50 Bitcoins?


[Michael Elliot] (14:36 - 14:40)
At the time, yeah. I think I've like -- I probably sold it or I've lost it.


[Anna Rose] (14:40 - 14:42)
You've not found it?


[Michael Elliot] (14:42 - 14:43)
Well, actually, I got doxxed.


[Anna Rose] (14:43 - 14:44)
Okay.


[Michael Elliot] (14:44 - 14:45)
That went to Mt. Gox.


[Anna Rose] (14:46 - 14:46)
Oh.


[Michael Elliot] (14:46 - 14:51)
I learned about the importance of self-custody the hard way.


[Anna Rose] (14:51 - 14:51)
Oh, man.


[Michael Elliot] (14:52 - 14:59)
An important lesson that I don't think I'll soon forget. And then, a few different projects. And then fast forward, I joined the MakerDAO team.


[Anna Rose] (14:59 - 15:00)
Okay.


[Michael Elliot] (15:00 - 15:24)
Probably because I cared so much about self-custody because I'd lost so many Bitcoins from Mt. Gox. So as a software architect there, I helped to build a single-collateral Dai and then multi-collateral Dai. The ability to self-custody these stablecoins, pretty exciting and cool, and very useful for so many use cases.


Yeah, that was really, really fun. And I kind of forayed into the Ethereum ecosystem at the time.


[Anna Rose] (15:24 - 15:34)
Did you encounter ZK there? I mean, I vaguely remember... there was formal verification happening there, but I don't think there was really a ZK team at MakerDAO. Was there?


[Michael Elliot] (15:34 - 15:55)
Not really. It was still pretty nascent at the time. There weren't many products around. 


But I did start diving into, I think it was the Whiteboard Sessions at one point, I remember, but also just other resources online.


And then I stumbled across Aztec and zk.money, participated in the Aztec's Ignition ceremony. That was cool. They were trying to set up --


[Anna Rose] (15:56 - 16:04)
Oh, yeah. Nice. Yeah, actually we had them on the show. We did a whole show just about trusted setups, which had that Ignition ceremony as well.


[Michael Elliot] (16:04 - 16:07)
I actually learned a lot originally from listening to ZK podcast.


[Anna Rose] (16:07 - 16:08)
Oh, Nice.


[Michael Elliot] (16:08 - 16:12)
And the guests you'd have on the products, and then I'd go and research it afterwards, and learn more about it.


[Anna Rose] (16:12 - 16:12)
Cool.


[Michael Elliot] (16:12 - 16:34)
I went through a deep diver call for a couple of months where I, using Python, I just experiment and try to write these primitives for like a stock or whatever it might be to learn from first principles.


I wouldn't recommend it. It's pretty full on. It takes a lot of -- you have to really get in there and be committed.


It is satisfying though to actually see it and how it plays out in the math and the code.


[Anna Rose] (16:35 - 16:45)
When did you fully jump into ZK though? When did you start to -- it sounds like, okay, so you're building some primitives, but at what point did you start to maybe engage with the community or want to start contributing?


[Michael Elliot] (16:45 - 17:30)
So I think I played around with Circom a little bit, but then it was probably like mid 2023, that I discovered Noir and it was still, it was very early days. So it was still kind of janky. It's come a long way since then.


I really wanted to build something cool to see what I could get out of Noir, this DSL and how far I could push it. And then as I was thinking about cool ideas, I learned about ePassports and that they have this NFC chip in it and that most people actually have this in their passport. And then also most smartphones had to have a NFC reader.


And then, so all the pieces were there, and it was a matter of just connecting them up and building it out. And that was the first prototype for ZKPassport.


[Anna Rose] (17:30 - 17:32)
Very cool. What timeframe did you build that?


[Michael Elliot] (17:33 - 17:34)
So that was probably like late 2023.


[Anna Rose] (17:35 - 17:39)
So this is before you came to zkSummit. You already had this prototype.


[Michael Elliot] (17:40 - 18:14)
That's right. Yeah. Yeah.


And then I recall meeting Théo. So the first time I met Théo was at zkSummit Athens, and he was building out a similar project, separate from me, called Ocelots.


And so I remember, I think we were at like the gathering before the summit, people were having dinner and eating. And because I was chatting with Théo before that, I knew what he looked like in the profile picture. Very, very distinct, the hair.


And so I saw him sitting across at the table and it just so happened that you'd put Théo and I on back-to-back, these almost identical workshops, purely by accident.


[Anna Rose] (18:14 - 18:16)
Oh, yeah. Oops.


[Michael Elliot] (18:16 - 18:33)
So I took the opportunity to approach Théo and be like, Oh, hey, mate. I'm Michael from ZKPassport. I noticed we have pretty much the same workshop back-to-back. Did you want to maybe like coordinate and we can maybe specialise and differentiate a little bit?


And so we did. And so that was great. So we had slightly different --


[Anna Rose] (18:33 - 18:33)
Oh, good.


[Michael Elliot] (18:34 - 18:34)
Yeah, workshops.


[Anna Rose] (18:35 - 18:40)
That's always tricky. I think we sometimes try to group things that seem similar in the programme, but yeah.


[Michael Elliot] (18:40 - 18:46)
It doesn't always work to the advantage of the -- and coming up next is the exact same workshop.


[Anna Rose] (18:47 - 18:49)
We do try to give speakers a heads up.


[Michael Elliot] (18:49 - 18:54)
It was actually fun because that was a reason to chat with Théo and approach him. And then we spoke a bit more about it.


[Anna Rose] (18:54 - 18:55)
Very cool.


[Michael Elliot] (18:55 - 19:02)
And I guess the friendship kind of blossomed from there and fast forward to today and now we're co-founders. So you're a critical part of our origin story.


[Anna Rose] (19:03 - 19:09)
Wow! So nice. And then you did end up collaborating at ZK Hack Kraków on that project.


[Michael Elliot] (19:09 - 19:11)
Yes, that's right. CornHub.


[Anna Rose] (19:12 - 19:24)
Nice. So it sounds like both of you were sort of early adopters or early kind of participants in the Aztec community. You were both kind of interested in Noir. I don't know, Mike, was the first version of ZKPassport also written in Noir?


[Michael Elliot] (19:25 - 19:28)
Yes. Yeah. Noir was super janky at that point. It has come such a long way since then.


[Anna Rose] (19:28 - 20:12)
Oh, yeah. Nice. Cool. Cool. Yeah. Let's talk about that.


But okay, ZKPassport. I mean, when I first heard the idea, it was the simple idea similar to Open Passport at the time. There's a bunch of projects that were just realising this use case for ZK. You could use ZK to prove an identity onchain. You could start bringing like the physical passport, the uniqueness of the physical passport onchain.


That's what ZKPassport was when you shared it with me at ZK Kraków. It was sort of like a little demo. You were like, look, you can scan the passport. It was super cool.


But I feel like since then, especially when I spoke to both of you after ZK Hack Berlin, this summer, it sounded like the project had evolved quite a lot.


So tell me what has happened. What is ZKPassport today? What do you aim to be?


[Michael Elliot] (20:13 - 22:11)
So ZKPassport is this credibly neutral, so we're not bound to any particular chain, permissionless, so anyone can integrate with this without having to have any existing accounts set up or anything like that.


We have the same access to integrate with ZKPassport as anybody else does. This public goods identity infrastructure. So the vision really is to have this ability to verify your identity through using passports, which is government-attested identity or ID cards.


And it's kind of this decentralized approach, if you think about it with passports and ID cards, because there's no global issuer. Each country, they attest over these credentials of their own citizens separate from other countries, which is -- yeah, it's really cool, this federated approach. We think that's the right way it should be done.


Because if you think about when you get married or you change your name, who do you go to? You go to the local government, the federal government to recognise that, and then they'll issue you a birth certificate, update your credentials on your ePassport and whatnot.


And so we're really excited about having this be this kind of identity infrastructure for Web3, and there's all these other tools now that we're excited about building out that can plug into that and consume these identity primitives.


One of them we're building out is, and this kind of follows on to this dream I have of having the self-custody ability to have electronic peer-to-peer cash, but with privacy baked in, and the ability to have the ZKPassport provide this decentralized permissionless compliance layer that respects the privacy of the user, so that you can utilise these private stablecoins, but also not run afoul of governments.


Exchangers aren't going to be wary about using it, having it come through an off-ramp, which is a UX issue then.


And ultimately, the dream of Obsidion is to have, I guess, kind of like you can imagine it as a revolute with crypto rails as the way that payments are facilitated. And privacy is a critical component of that.


[Anna Rose] (22:11 - 22:22)
So ZKPassport, everything you've described is really about this passport, but Obsidion, what is it? Is it a wallet? Is it a platform? How do those two things connect?


[Michael Elliot] (22:23 - 23:32)
I think this all really comes from the original vision of Satoshi on the white paper of having this electronic peer-to-peer cash. But if you think about one of the properties of cash is you also have privacy.


[Anna Rose] (22:32 - 22:33)
For sure.


[Michael Elliot] (22:33 - 23:57)
And if we want to really make use of stablecoins and use them in the real world, you need to have privacy. Even if it's bank-level privacy, because the current approach is obviously not going to -- people aren't going to pay their mortgage, buy groceries, all of these kinds of things, if everybody can see it on this transparent ledger. And so we want to realise that.


So privacy is one of the steps and that's super important. Aztec's building that out. Miden, Payy, other projects. But then going a step further, you also need to have some kind of best effort compliance. And so Web2 KYC, this kind of stuff is not compatible with blockchain.


So we're building out ZKPassport to also be this Web3 identity infrastructure that is compatible, allows you to say, I have a fully private USDC, and then every time you transfer it around, you could be proving you're not on a sanctions list, proving you're not from a sanctioned country, whatever the requirements may be.


And that's going to satisfy regulators. And the idea is that then people can use it and not have to go to these centralised KYC providers and give up their privacy and compromise on that. And then, as we've seen throughout the last several years, so many hacks and leaks occur. So that's just inevitable.


But if the surface area to begin with is very minimal, just like a ZK proof that proves certain facts about you, even if it gets hacked, there's no issue there.


[Anna Rose] (23:58 - 24:11)
But in that case then, ZKPassport was the first kind of product. But now it almost sounds like Obsidion is the main product and ZKPassport is the KYC mechanism for Obsidion. Is that true? Is that how you're thinking about the project?


[Théo Madzou] (24:12 - 24:59)
ZKPassport is really its own thing that we're still finishing up, but it's getting close to completion right now. So we have a new feature coming in. And actually, it's already out, or it should be out by the time this podcast is going to be airing.


It's this idea of private FaceMatch. So you do prove that you are the person on the passport or the ID by doing a local only face recognition with a liveness check. We use the attestation service from Apple and Google and Android, so iOS, Android to attest that this was run properly, and then that attestation is verified in the verifier onchain or offchain, depending on what kind of verification you do.


So this is the kind of feature that we need for an actual KYC because you need that kind of guarantee and assurance.


[Michael Elliot] (24:59 - 25:27)
This is like the icing on the cake here. So you have all these other checks, but you don't know that the person using the passport to prove their identity is necessarily the person on the passport.


And so you still have scammers selling -- you know they have a box of passports, for example.


But this private FaceMatch that we're launching very soon may already be out by the time this airs, like Théo said, you can prove that you are the person on the passport without ever revealing your face. And that's just so cool. That really taps into the magic of ZK.


[Anna Rose] (25:28 - 25:30)
Yeah. And this is all done locally, I guess, on the phone.


[Michael Elliot] (25:30 - 25:58)
Yeah. So we have the full cryptographic guarantee on the passport side, but then you have this mobile TEE guarantee, which on an iPhone is super high. The bar is really high. Not even like some federal agencies can't even crack it.


And then, it's essentially driving this face print all locally, so nothing's ever leaving the phone through a machine learning model, runs all locally on the phone. And then you can compare in zero knowledge, this face print that you are the person on the photograph that's signed over by the government.


[Anna Rose] (25:58 - 26:37)
Got it. It's funny because other projects that we've had on the show, I think Self mentioned this. I've heard of this biometric or visual kind of matching. You're using potentially the face feature. But I'm not sure if they've shipped. I think this is the first time at least we're hearing about it shipping.


But then again, Obsidion, I don't know if you really answered what I was asking where it's like, what is the larger Obsidion project?


You sort of said, okay, so ZKPassport is its own project. You're not abandoning it. It's super important. I think I'm not entirely clear on like what Obsidion is meant to be. Is it a wallet? Is it an exchange? What is it?


[Théo Madzou] (26:37 - 27:09)
We use the elements of a wallet to build more like a fintech app, like a bank, but built on crypto rails. So instead of using TradFi, traditional finance, we use actual privacy-preserving blockchain with Aztec. And ZKPassport is going to come in as the primary tool for compliance.


So this is why we have the separate product ZKPassport that we'll plug into it. So we need it to be finalised. And then Obsidion can build on top of that as separate products.


[Michael Elliot] (27:09 - 27:58)
Keeping ZKPassport as credibly neutral, no-profit incentive. It's purely public goods. But we can build out all these for-profit ventures now that plug into this infrastructure and utilise it like anyone else could.


And we have a handful, by the way, like a bunch of all these exciting ideas, but we can only obviously do one thing at a time.


So you can imagine like there's like e-signatures, but forget Docusign or even Google signatures, you can sign yourself over a PDF, it's like a zkPDF, but embedding your actual name that your government has attested over, even your signature is embedded sometimes in e-passports, maybe even secured by a private FaceMatch.


That is such a stronger guarantee than just Docusign servers saying, oh, this is the IP address of the person that signed. We think it's them. They typed their name into the prompt and their initials.


So that's an exciting another possible integration.


[Anna Rose] (27:59 - 28:12)
Cool. This is funny because you talk about being like this credibly neutral public good unbound to a network, but you are built on Aztec. So aren't you kind of bound to Ethereum? Aren't you kind of tied to at least the Ethereum ecosystem?


[Théo Madzou] (28:13 - 28:59)
Well, the way we've built ZKPassport in that context, so if we take our Obsidion, which is kind of bound more to the Aztec technology, although we could expand later, but ZKPassport, you could use it fully offchain. So you don't have to use onchain if you don't want to.


So that's probably what Web2 people would probably use ZKPassport for, like a fully offchain verification with our SDK. That makes it pretty easy to use. If you want to do, for example, server-side verification, other proofs. So our SDK is handling all that. There's a pretty great level of abstraction, so it's very simple to plug in.


It's like a regular NPM package, so an average web developer won't have to worry too much about the complexity of it. They're just like, they're interacting with a passport or national ID. Then there's privacy preserving and they can query the data they want about it.


[Michael Elliot] (29:00 - 29:05)
It's like dot-sanctions, dot-FaceMatch. It'll add that to the prompt when the person goes to verify.


[Théo Madzou] (29:06 - 31:05)
Now we do have the tooling if you want to verify it onchain. We have the Solidity verifier that allows you to verify the proof onchain. So if you want to interact with your smart contract, you can verify the proof and you have a bunch of helper functions that allows you to verify specific information that you requested in the proof.


If you want to verify that someone's over 18, if you want to verify that someone is not from a specific list of country or is not part of the sanction list, we also have that. Like if you're not part of the OFAC sanction list. And also, if you want to verify that someone went through the FaceMatch check, you can verify that onchain as well.


Just to finish more on the offchain and onchain aspect, the only thing that's always done onchain, but that's not very -- I mean, that's not tying up to the ecosystem, but I guess we use Ethereum as the base, is that we have our registries of the certificates of the country that sign the passports and national IDs.


So we create a Merkle tree of that, and the root of that Merkle tree of all the public keys of the certificate is settled onchain.


So we got also a registry of our circuits. So essentially the circuits that can generate the proofs. And I'm going to talk about the subproof and subcircuits idea so that people can understand what those are. But all the circuits that we created, their verification key hash is part of the Merkle tree as well. And that Merkle tree root is also settled onchain.


So essentially what the final proof will be able to verify, what the verifier can verify is that that proof was generated with a certificate from a given country without knowing which one. So it's a valid ID issued by one country.


So you could have a proof that only verifies that you have a valid ID without checking which country or revealing which country, and also verifies that it was generated with a circuit that's from us. So it's not a random circuit.


[Michael Elliot] (31:05 - 31:29)
One cool thing about the certificate registry is that it's also permissionless. So what that means is there are these master lists that are curated by ICAO, the International Civil Aviation Authority. Different governments, they sign over these master lists and they provide them to ICAO.


And so anybody can update this certificate registry by providing a valid proof that these certificates were signed by a recognised root key.


[Anna Rose] (31:30 - 32:04)
So when I had this episode with Self, we were talking about like one of the big challenges of working with passports from across the world.


There's sort of these clusters of countries that are using similar signature algorithms or hashing algorithms, but then you also have different, like you get a bunch of different signature algorithms used by different countries. So it's not consistent in the world.


So is this something you're also facing? Is this something you're also having to do? Are you able to share resources actually with the Self team? I'm just curious if this is something you're looking at.


[Théo Madzou] (32:04 - 32:53)
So yes, this is definitely something we had trouble with. So each country is free to choose within a given set of signature algorithm and hashing algorithm.


So it could be RSA, which is one of the most common, but actually a bit outdated, to be honest, and ECDSA. So that one is more known, I think, to people in crypto, but they actually don't use the curves, the elliptic curves that people are used to in crypto, because this is kind of like they don't care about the same things.


And the hashing algorithm can be multiple 00 kind of like hashing algorithm could be a SHA-256, which is quite common, or it could be a less common like SHA-512, which has been more demanding in circuits or even SHA-1, which is technically not secure anymore. But in that context, it should be somewhat fine.


[Michael Elliot] (32:54 - 33:01)
And not just one per passport. There's different places they use throughout the passport data. And so some countries will use it in three different places, three different algorithms. So it gets wild, yeah.


[Théo Madzou] (33:01 - 34:08)
The hashing algorithm can be used at different stages. And at those different stages, sometimes they use different hashing algorithm, making the whole thing even harder to deal with.


Because within the circuit, you have to have like a deterministic thing. So you can't just do dynamic stuff like in a regular programme. So you need to know in advance what you're going to need to use. So that creates a lot of different combinations.


Now, the nice thing about Noir is that we've been able to streamline all this. And so we have some kind of circuit generator that essentially generates all the possible combinations. And so we don't have to worry too much about it.


So far, we got about 600 circuits here. So this idea of subcircuits, which we can go into just a bit after, but we had to create a lot of different circuits for all those different combinations.


But to get there, we had to support all the hash algorithm and the signature algorithm. So we had to support the RSA with the different combinations and ECDSA with the different curves and the hash algorithm. So you even have variation with the type of RSA as well, PKCS and PSS.


[Michael Elliot] (34:08 - 34:13)
And there's this exotic brain pool I hadn't heard about until I discovered it.


[Théo Madzou] (34:13 - 34:35)
So that's a kind of curve used, like a curve family, which is used a lot in European countries, Germany being the main one that uses it, but all the countries in Europe do use it. Even for the one that like the least common, you need to add support for it. Something that's used by only one country, you still need to add it.


[Anna Rose] (34:35 - 34:41)
You still have to do it.


But I'm just curious, so you're going through country by country, but you have another team that's doing it too. Do you guys share resources?


[Théo Madzou] (34:42 - 35:01)
We publicly share essentially all the signature algorithm we support. So you can go on our website. We have like a list where you can search and you can search the country and you will see what hashing algorithm it uses and what signature algorithm it uses. You will see the public key that's used.


So all this information, we make it public so everyone can verify it.


[Michael Elliot] (35:01 - 35:04)
That's registry.zkpassport.id.


[Théo Madzou] (35:04 - 35:32)
So I guess when it comes to sharing between teams, we indirectly share a lot because we're using the same sources for the most part. So for example, what Michael mentioned before, which is the ICAO master list. So this is containing most of the certificate we use, but we do have to get it from other master lists from countries, for example, that provide their own, like Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy, and others.


[Michael Elliot] (35:32 - 35:49)
In terms of collaborating with the circuits, we imagine that like Self, even World is exploring they're using our circuits. Because they're using Circom, you need this trusted setup for each circuit. So 300 megabytes roughly, for the ZK times 600 different circuits.


[Anna Rose] (35:49 - 35:49)
Oh my God.


[Michael Elliot] (35:49 - 35:54)
That's probably why they're using TEE for a lot of this because it gets very difficult and cumbersome.


[Anna Rose] (35:55 - 35:57)
Yeah. Are you using TEEs or no?


[Michael Elliot] (35:57 - 36:11)
Only for the private FaceMatch. Not at that level. Everything else is cryptographically secured by these nice little augmented features like location, like a location check that does a GPS check, and then just a mobile TEE or the private FaceMatch.


[Théo Madzou] (36:11 - 36:39)
Well, we're not using like TEEs in the same sense that they are. So we're not using TEEs on the server. So we don't have to transmit the data out of the device at any point.


We do full native proving on the mobile. And for the TEE that Michael mentioned, this is using the TEE guarantees of the phone. So with the cryptographic keys and the cryptographic algorithm you have inside the secure element or secure enclave of the phone.


So we're fully committed to client-side operations, essentially.


[Michael Elliot] (36:40 - 36:43)
Yeah. In fact, we built out a lot of the tooling that we're using.


[Théo Madzou] (36:43 - 36:43)
Yeah.


[Michael Elliot] (36:44 - 36:46)
It's built on top of Aztec's Barretenberg prover.


[Théo Madzou] (36:47 - 36:56)
That was also quite a lot of work, like the mobile proving tooling. Because when we first started the circuits, we had all circuits in Noir. Great. Now, how do we do this on the mobile phone?


[Michael Elliot] (36:57 - 36:58)
Yeah. It's very different.


[Théo Madzou] (36:58 - 37:34)
Because when we started at the time, mobile proving was not much a priority in the industry as far as I remember. So I was like, we had to push for it. Now it's much more trendy to do mobile proving. You have a lot of new proving systems that comes up very regularly, even zkVMs now on mobile as well.


And we had to create the whole thing. So we had to take on Barretenberg, the backend used by Aztec to generate the proofs. And I tweak it to work on mobile and build the whole thing to make it work with Swift and Kotlin on iOS and Android. Now the whole thing works pretty seamlessly.


[Michael Elliot] (37:34 - 37:42)
We call it Swoir, but it's Swift and Noir. And then we call the backend prover that plugs in Swoirenberg , based on Brattenberg.


[Anna Rose] (37:42 - 37:55)
Okay, very good. I want to talk a little bit about the Noir evolution because you've hinted at it. You sort of talked about this early version of Noir that was very hard to use. You've been part of this community.


What stage would you say it's at today?


[Théo Madzou] (37:56 - 38:46)
So Noir has changed a lot. The first time I used it, which was ZK Hack Lisbon, I think that was version 0.10. At the time, there was a very lean language, not many features. It was already Rust looking, but not as full features as it is today.


Today, it's much closer to production. There's many more libraries available. There's a big chunk of the libraries that we contributed to, actually, especially the RSA library, the ECDSA one. We have a date library that we use for the age comparison and stuff like this. But others also contributed.


So in Noir ecosystem, you have a lot of tools you would need to do most circuits without having to do the whole thing yourself. And the language is about to get audited. So that's definitely going to reach full production state fairly soon. 


[Michael Elliot] (38:46 - 38:49)
At this point, it's really like just using Rust. It's so similar.


[Théo Madzou] (38:49 - 38:51)
Yeah, there's a lot of similarities.


[Anna Rose] (38:52 - 39:03)
Cool. How big is the Noir community from where you're sitting? I mean, you're not working at Aztec, so maybe they have better numbers here. But I'm just curious, given that you're pretty deep in this ecosystem, what does it seem like to you?


[Théo Madzou] (39:04 - 39:28)
I'm trying to gauge because there's the Noir community and then there's the Aztec community, and those are two different things. I would have a hard time putting a number on it. It's definitely growing and people are more dropping Circom and Halo2 to move to Noir.


For example, Payy, which Michael mentioned before, they moved to Noir recently. They were using Halo2 for their circuits.


So there's definitely a trend. Everyone is converging onto Noir.


[Anna Rose] (39:28 - 39:50)
Oh, that's nice. I still want to understand a little bit the relationship to the Aztec community and what you expect to be within Aztec. You're built on their system.


Would you be the application that when people want to use Aztec, they'd go to use Obsidion? Or do you see Obsidion as being a product on its own that you're just going out to the market with?


[Michael Elliot] (39:50 - 40:12)
We feel like Aztec is the most mature in terms of what they built out with this blockchain that allows private state and programmability. It's such an undertaking engineering-wise. There's Miden and there's others that are working on this, but it's such a challenge that that's why we're building it on Aztec.


But high level, the vision of the product really is private stablecoins with compliance.


[Théo Madzou] (40:13 - 41:06)
So Obsidion may split into different things. You have the wallet, the pure wallet that needs to be used by people in the ecosystem that are more hardcore users. But the end goal is definitely to have a product that's targeting average people, kind of like not for power users.


So that version would be more focused on simple financial related stuff that you can build on top of Aztec.


And the nice thing about Aztec is that it's been built with the desire of providing full privacy if you need it. But thanks to this hybrid model with that public state and now as well with the collaboration they did with TACEO, the private shared state, you can have all you need to do whatever level of privacy you want, depending on your use case.


So the best layer is like it can give you full privacy and it's up to you as an application developer to choose what level you want to provide to users.


[Michael Elliot] (41:07 - 41:20)
One important thing worth noting is if you start out at the foundation with privacy, you can always reduce the privacy as you progress, but you need to start from the base layer of full privacy. You can't start the other way around because you've already given up privacy.


[Anna Rose] (41:21 - 41:32)
Yeah. But do you see Obsidion then as something that you expect developers to build on top of as well? I'm just trying to figure out if this is a go-to-market end product that you download this thing or if it's like a tool.


[Théo Madzou] (41:32 - 42:04)
The way I see it, so for the wallet, dApps could definitely interact with it. So that's kind of the point. But the end product -- when I say wallet versus end product, right now we have the web app that people can use, like the wallet on testnet.


So this is what I consider like the full wallet for hardcore users, like power users. And the end product will be more like a mobile app. So mobile focused, essentially simplified UX/UI, simple to use, Revolut feeling.


[Anna Rose] (42:04 - 42:05)
Yeah. So like an app.


[Théo Madzou] (42:05 - 42:36)
Like an app. And the integration into the app from the dApps is probably going to be a bit more controlled. So the UX feel more natural.


So in terms of customisation, it might be a bit less than the web app. So you will have like the two options. If you want to have more natural, like simple product, you use the mobile app. And if you want to have a more complete like wallet, you would use the web app. So this is how I see it.


That may still need refinement as we develop the strategy, but this is how I see the dichotomy here.


[Anna Rose] (42:36 - 43:05)
How do you see the competitive space for this type of product? Because, I mean, just on this show, we've had Self and Rarimo and Billions Network and we're going to have Payy and that kind of thing. So it's like there's a lot of products right now coming out that are trying to tackle ID.


Some are working directly with governments. Some are going more to the end user. Yeah, you're in that space. What is that competitive space like? What makes you guys different?


[Michael Elliot] (43:05 - 43:19)
So on the ZKPassport side, it's all about being in a credibly neutral public goods identity infrastructure, like I said before. And so, we're not really trying to compete too much, and there's definitely no-profit incentive on that side. So we want it to be as open as possible.


[Théo Madzou] (43:19 - 45:00)
So we have a certain desire to complete as engineers ourselves and what we would like to see as an API to consume, to do a verification.


So we want something simple to use, something that feels plug and play, something that's credibly neutral so you can use it for free if you want. We do provide some nice added product that you could pay for, but you could always set up your infrastructure built on top of ours and use it as you want.


And the other thing is that we want to refine the UX. So from the user perspective, we want it to be easy to use. And this is a very complex thing to make people understand because this is not natural. It doesn't feel natural to scan your passport, to scan your national ID. And while it may feel natural to us, you have to think about the average users.


They're going to be told, oh, you need to do verification with your passport and national ID. Now scan the chip. Most people actually don't know there's a chip in it. So they're like, well, am I supposed to take a picture of it, I'm supposed to scan with my camera?


Now, from our perspective, this sounds maybe a little bit ludicrous, but they never heard about it. So they don't know. So you need to refine the UX, you need to guide them. There's a lot of work in making that good enough so that most people don't run into those issues.


So we really want to build something both from the developer experience perspective and the user experience perspective that's nicely thought, nicely put well together. And even the current base as well, we want it to be well structured.


So this is where this idea of subproofs and subcircuits kind of feel pretty great because it's very modular. It's very easy for us to add new circuits like we did with FaceMatch to add new features.


[Michael Elliot] (45:00 - 45:06)
So we didn't have a chance to chat about the subcircuits, which is what allows us to actually do the mobile client-side proving.


[Théo Madzou] (45:06 - 46:37)
Yeah. So the subcircuits is an interesting way we found to structure our circuits because of the constraints of mobile proving. So on mobile, you have limited amount of RAM. So you can't do massive circuits, at least with most proving systems. Some have found solution to that, but they came after.


So we split the circuit in different chunks that do specific part of the verification logic. And so we have like, let's say four core subcircuits in the process.


So the first one is the verification of the signature from the issuing government over the intermediary certificate. The second one is that intermediary certificate, which signs over the passport data. We verify this in the second subcircuit.


The third one verifies that the data of the passport that was signed indeed is correct. So essentially the data we use in the other circuits for revealing data is the data that was hashed down to the message that was signed by the state.


And the final one is what we call the disclosures circuit. So whatever information you want to disclose, that could be your name, that could be your age, or that could be a FaceMatch, all those are like disclosure proofs.


And all this fits together and we combine it into a final proof, which is what we call an [?] outer proof, which essentially is a circuit that recursively verify all the said proofs into one that can then be verified onchain or offchain.


[Michael Elliot] (46:37 - 46:48)
The nice part about this design is we can cache those first three proofs and then you pivot off that last proof. So it's like it takes a second basically to prove the disclosure circuit.


[Théo Madzou] (46:48 - 47:11)
From a UX perspective, when the user uses the app, it's actually quite fast because when you scan your passport, your ID card, that's when we generate those three first proofs, which we call the base proofs. And so those are cached, and you don't even realise it's like they're generating in the background.


So by the time you actually do a verification, you're only going to generate the disclosure proofs. So it's just a few seconds because those are much smaller.


[Anna Rose] (47:12 - 47:15)
Is this different from the way that some of those other projects are built?


[Théo Madzou] (47:16 - 47:43)
So other projects, they're built a bit different. Rarimo and Self, they use Circom. And as far as I understand, they don't use this kind of logic we have, where especially with the commitment we have between each proof and this idea of parameter commitment that allows us to have a universal interface for all our disclosure proofs.


So essentially we came up with that because it means we don't have to worry about the kind of logic we need to do for the disclosure proofs.


[Michael Elliot] (47:43 - 47:45)
The public API is the same for each circuit.


[Théo Madzou] (47:46 - 47:57)
It's always the same because essentially whatever private input we put into the circuit, we can always arrange it into the same interface with public input because they are all committed to into that parameter commitment.


[Michael Elliot] (47:57 - 48:03)
So it's just hashed over and then you can break it out outside the actual circuit pre-verification.


[Théo Madzou] (48:04 - 48:18)
So the verifier is actually the one that's going to get those parameter commitments, get the committed inputs and recompute them to make sure that they're correct. And so this happens both with the offchain verifier and the onchain one on EVMs.


[Anna Rose] (48:18 - 48:28)
Got it. Are you also though looking at other kinds of kind of proof of identification beyond passport for ZKPassport, or are you just focused on passport still?


[Théo Madzou] (48:28 - 49:05)
So we support passport, national IDs and residence permits, which follow this kind of same standard.


So in the EU, it's actually, it was quite easy to support national IDs and residence permits because they use the same standard and they have a mandate. So they mandated all EU members to issue national IDs that are following this standard since 2021.


So now most Europeans would actually have an ID that's compatible with it. Because while you may not have a passport because you only need one if you want to travel outside the Schengen area, if you're European, for example, a lot of the national IDs are actually compulsory. So they will have to have one.


[Michael Elliot] (49:06 - 49:12)
Which is great because then you get like a near 99% saturation in that country.


[Théo Madzou] (49:13 - 49:52)
But not all of them are already electronic because the old ones may not be, but the new ones are.


For now, we kind of want to focus on this specific standard, refine the UX. So do one thing and do one thing properly, correctly, rather than expanding and spread out in things and do it averagely good.


And once we have tackled this properly, we can add others. So that could include maybe Aadhaar from India, or that could include as well the driving licences.


But the issue with the driving licences is the standard is quite different. It might not have the same assumptions in terms of privacy, because you kind of have to go through the third party.


[Michael Elliot] (49:53 - 49:56)
It's a JWT, similar to like the zkLogin approach, I guess you could say.


[Anna Rose] (49:57 - 50:16)
I think isn't this -- this is what Google Wallet also they've been tackling the licences of the US. We had an episode with them talking about that. And they use ZK in a very specific way as well, but it did sound like it was more bespoke for that particular card, that kind of ID.


[Théo Madzou] (50:16 - 50:32)
The nice thing is that they are not -- because they essentially, it's an interactive process, and they only have to use the signature from the secure element, the secure element is using one specific signature algorithm. It's like a P-256, which they can highly optimise for. And so it's like pretty fast.


[Michael Elliot] (50:32 - 50:38)
It didn't need 600 circuits for it to work. They can just do one circuit really well.


[Théo Madzou] (50:39 - 50:44)
Well, in our case, we have to optimise for a lot of different signature algorithms. So it's like, we can't tweak it as much.


[Anna Rose] (50:45 - 50:51)
Is ZKPassport out in the wild? Have people already interacted with it? Or do you have plans to have them do that?


[Michael Elliot] (50:51 - 51:04)
So yeah, we integrated with DevCon Southeast Asia last year to provide discounts to anyone from Southeast Asia. And so you could prove that you're from that country. Really cool integration. We had thousands of people come through and get their ticket using that.


[Anna Rose] (51:04 - 51:04)
Cool.


[Michael Elliot] (51:04 - 51:38)
And then we've also integrated with DevConnect this year. Same approach, but it's for if you're from Latin America. 


And then another integration we have is with Aztec Testnet. So for sequencers to provide like sybil resistance and preventing botting. As part of that, you prove that you're not on a sanctions list as well, and you have the sybil-resistance property to essentially prove that there's an actual person behind the validator, and not a thousand different people that have signed up just for airdrop farming.


[Théo Madzou] (51:38 - 51:49)
Yeah. This integration in particular with Aztec has been very beneficial to us because we had a lot of people going through it. Like over 20,000 people, or even 30,000 if I remember correctly.


[Anna Rose] (51:48 - 51:49)
So like you stress tested.


[Théo Madzou] (51:50 - 51:50)
Yeah.


[Michael Elliot] (51:49 - 51:55)
Edge cases galore. We fixed so many bugs. It was a month of just full-on bug fixing.


[Anna Rose] (51:55 - 51:55)
Good.


[Michael Elliot] (51:55 - 51:59)
Super helpful. So thanks a lot to Aztec for that. It was great. Really helped to polish the product.


[Anna Rose] (51:59 - 52:21)
Nice. So thank you so much for sharing the story of -- well, I guess first ZK Hack and your entry point into ZK. Mike, your story of being involved in blockchain stuff for a long time, and then finding ZK, the story of ZKPassport itself, the introduction of Obsidion, some of the relationships between them. And yeah, some of the features that you guys are working on.


Thanks so much.


[Théo Madzou] (52:21 - 52:22)
Thank you, Anna.


[Michael Elliot] (52:22 - 52:24)
Yeah. Thanks, Anna. This has been really fun.


[Anna Rose] (52:24 - 52:31)
Cool. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya, and Hector.


And to our listeners, thanks for listening.


~MK