[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:04)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online. This is our 400th episode of the Zero Knowledge Podcast.


And this week, I bring Dan Boneh back on the show. For those who don't know, Dan is a professor of computer science and electrical engineering at Stanford University, and one of my favourite guests. We start off in discussing Google's quantum algorithm announcement, as well as his involvement with that.


We cover the risks of rushing post-quantum cryptographic transitions, Dan's hesitation in offering timelines for quantum advancements, and why he believes algebraic signatures are preferable to hash-based ones. We also touch on exactly what the Google work showed, and the unusual way it was shared. We talk about the potential use of hybrid signatures for the post-quantum transition, as well as other advancements in cryptography and ZK systems that he and his research team are excited about.


We wrapped up with an update on the Ethereum Foundation's Proximity Prize, a $1 million challenge to resolve an open mathematical question that could meaningfully improve snarks. So what a great way to celebrate our 400th episode. As always with my conversations with Dan, I was left with a bunch of ideas for future topics that we could cover, as well as guests we could invite to the show.


So hope you enjoy our 400th episode. It's quite a milestone, and I want to say thank you to our listeners for sticking with us. Here's to many more Zero Knowledge Podcast episodes to come.


Now here's my interview with Dan. Today I'm here with one of my favourite guests, Dan Bonnet. Dan is a professor of computer science and electrical engineering at Stanford University.


Welcome back to the show, Dan.


[Dan Boneh] (2:05 - 2:07)
Thank you, Anna. It's always fun to be on the show.


[Anna Rose] (2:07 - 3:00)
Cool. And I think you may be aware of this. This is episode 400 of the Zero Knowledge Podcast.


And I was very excited to have, I really thought about it. I was like, who would be an amazing guest for this particular episode? I looked at when have you last been on?


What were the other episodes? And I feel like this is a perfect time to bring you back. ZK is in a bit of an inflexion moment, I feel like.


So much research has happened, and yet we're seeing it now kind of become applied all over the place. So it's like this very different moment for ZK. So I can't wait to talk to you about it.


I want to just highlight for the listeners some of our previous episodes in case they want to check it out. You were our guest on episode 100, then again on episode 256, and then in late 2024, you were episode 345. We kept picking kind of good numbers for your episodes.


[Dan Boneh] (3:00 - 3:02)
My God, I can't wait to be on episode 512.


[Anna Rose] (3:02 - 4:08)
Exactly. Yes, that's our next one. One of the things I've really liked about these episodes is I feel like every time you come on, you highlight a lot of very cutting edge research.


And in the episodes that come after that, maybe it might take us a few months, might even take us a few years, we eventually get to cover them. And so when I was listening back to episode 100, for example, you were talking about code obfuscation. You were talking about making things post-quantum.


You know, I feel like those threads that have become more and more relevant over the years were already placed. You talked about content provenance in episode 256. And then I know the last episode, you talked about lattices, which I had never really heard about.


And last year, we actually got a chance to dive quite deep into lattices with some interviews with Vadim and Binyi, and we also covered it in the ZK Whiteboard sessions. So I know we have a lot to cover. So one of the most relevant topics, and maybe something we can kick off with, is the work you did with Google on a recent paper on their quantum advancements.


So maybe we can start there.


[Dan Boneh] (4:09 - 6:04)
Yeah, that's a great way to start. Actually, maybe I can zoom out for just one second, Anna. The topics that I hope we can cover is, of course, everybody's interested in quantum these days.


So we'll talk about some quantum aspects and new developments. I'm also hoping we can talk a little bit about the Proximity Prize that the Ethereum Foundation put out. I find that really exciting, and it's a kind of a cool math question.


You know, even if your audience is not going to work on the question, I just want people to know that there's this prize for this cool math question that would be fun to discuss. And then, you know, there are basically other blockchain-related crypto advances that are always, always fun. So I hope we have some time at the end to talk about more general crypto advances.


Of course, everything is related to ZK. So, yeah, so let's go back to the quantum question. And so maybe, is it OK if I start maybe just by kind of pointing out four points that I'd like people to take away, and then we can kind of drill down into these four points?


Let's do it. Yeah. So first of all, yeah, it's kind of interesting where you started.


The first question that people usually ask me is, when, right? When are we going to have a quantum computer? What's the timeline look like?


The answer is really nobody knows. I don't know. There's nobody else knows this.


We don't know. I'll say it's N years away for some unknown value of N, yeah? Now, sometimes people press me to kind of actually give a number.


And then what I, if you really, really, really insist, I kind of tell you that we can try to do a Moore's law-based calculation to see how fast these machines are improving and where they have to go. And then you get something like a number between 2035 and 2040. 2040 is probably more relevant.


But then a lot of the physicists basically tell me that Moore's law is not the right model for estimating this event, especially in the neutral atoms experiments, which we'll talk about, I guess, in just a second. That's not a good way to predict where things will happen. So the answer is, I don't know.


[Anna Rose] (6:05 - 6:17)
But why do you have teams making predictions? Like why does Google say, oh, we've moved up our kind of quantum date, a quantum reaching a certain level by X amount of years, and then a date is given? Like, why are they doing that?


[Dan Boneh] (6:18 - 8:21)
I'll answer that, but then I want to explain quickly my three other points, and then we'll dive deeper. But let me answer that. So, yeah, so you're right.


Both Google and Cloudflare have said that by 2029, they want everything to be transitioned to post-quantum. Now, it's important to understand, Google is a big organisation. Yeah.


The people who said 2029 for their transitions are not the quantum people. This is the Google security team. The Google security team made their own assessment, and they said, we want to transition Google to post-quantum security by post-quantum cryptography by 2029.


So, of course, I want to kind of say why they probably did this and why this is a reasonable idea. So, first of all, transitioning all of the Google infrastructure to post-quantum cryptography, that is a massive undertaking, in particular for digital signatures, right? For digital signatures, there's typically hardware involved.


You have to update your hardware, throw away old hardware, buy new hardware that's going to support all these post-quantum operations. That is a fairly significant undertaking. There's a very good chance that they're not going to meet the 2029 deadline.


By setting a 2029 deadline and missing it by three years, you know, they're still on pretty safe ground. Originally, they had set the 2035 deadline. If they had set it to be 2035 and then they missed that by three years, now we're going to getting into nervous territory.


Right now, we don't really know what's going to happen. So I think by moving the deadline earlier, in some sense, they're giving themselves some more slack, which is, you know, it's a reasonable thing to do. So that was my first point, the timeline.


Remember, nobody really knows. All we can do is speculate. And I'll talk more about the timeline, actually, as we dig deeper into it.


The second point I want to make, which I think is really important, is actually related to that, which is it's really important not to rush this transition. I'm quite worried that because people are setting deadlines to be quite aggressive, 2029 is a pretty aggressive deadline. We are more likely to make a catastrophic mistake than we are to be attacked by a quantum adversary.


[Anna Rose] (8:21 - 8:25)
Like implementing a scheme that hasn't been battle tested? Is that sort of what you're thinking?


[Dan Boneh] (8:25 - 9:18)
Well, let me give you an example. Let me give you an example. So, so let's just say this is a hypothetical situation, although somebody did just come and tell me about this.


So let's suppose you want to transition your company to post-quantum security. Well, today you're using hardware to sign, to generate your signatures. Yeah.


So these are called HSMs. So your ECDSA or Schnorr keys are in HSMs and the keys are protected by the hardware. Makes sense? So if somebody attacks your infrastructure, they can't steal the key because it's protected by the hardware.


Well, these HSMs don't support post-quantum signatures. They don't support MLDSA and Falcon and all the other post-quantum signatures. So what are they going to do?


If they want to transition now to post-quantum signatures, they only have one option, which is let's take the key out of the hardware and put it now on a regular CPU and generate signatures on the regular CPU. To me, that sounds like a step in the wrong direction.


[Anna Rose] (9:18 - 9:18)
Oh yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (9:18 - 9:24)
Because now you are more likely to be attacked by a regular hacker than by a quantum computer.


[Anna Rose] (9:24 - 9:24)
Wow.


[Dan Boneh] (9:24 - 10:21)
Okay. And so to me, the right course of action in this kind of decision procedure, decision environment is don't take your keys out of the HSM. You should instead lean on your HSM provider to support post-quantum signatures in their HSM hardware, wait for them to update their hardware, buy the new hardware, and then do the transition.


This is why setting the deadline to be 2029 is a good idea because you can go tell your HSM provider, hey, we want to transition by 2029. You guys got to get your act together and give us better hardware. Again, most likely they'll miss the deadline.


Yeah. But fine, we have a bit of slack and so they'll move only once the hardware is available, but they're not going to put their security keys, their signing keys at risk by moving them out of the hardware. Yeah.


And I have many other examples like this where it seems to me like there's a bit of a risk in rushing this transition. We really should take our time. This is a very complicated and I'll say interesting process.


[Anna Rose] (10:21 - 10:21)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (10:21 - 10:24)
And we don't want to rush it and cause some catastrophic mistake.


[Anna Rose] (10:24 - 10:48)
Do you think that idea though that like some of the systems that like the proving systems, I just think of like the ZK systems, like, yes, there are the post-quantum systems available, but some of them are newer, like they're cool, but they haven't necessarily been used much. Like, would you prefer that we wait and have those be out in the wild battle tested before you implement them? Is that a concern as well for any of the new post-quantum schemes, basically?


[Dan Boneh] (10:50 - 11:22)
Oh, for any of the post-quantum signatures? I think the implementation, of course, there's always questions about bugs and implementation, but honestly, the implementation is kind of not the main bottleneck. The implementation is, you know, like we said, all the hardware that goes around it.


Honestly, when you talk to people in industry who need to do, you know, people in healthcare, people in government, people in finance, like not like the hardcore techies like Google and Cloudflare, like everybody else in the world that has to do this post-quantum transition. The hardest thing for them is actually to find all the encryption code in their code base.


[Anna Rose] (11:23 - 11:23)
Oh, wow.


[Dan Boneh] (11:23 - 12:15)
And that's going to take a while. People have to actually figure out where are we doing encryption in our code base and then we have to replace it. And then, of course, there's a question of what to replace it with.


So all this stuff is going to take quite a while. And again, my point is, you know, let's not rush to avoid a catastrophic mistake that's much more dangerous than actually being attacked by a quantum computer. The third point I want to talk about is what do we move to?


So what post-quantum systems we want to move to? And I have a lot to say about that in the blockchain space. Let's just say that the core blockchains seem to be moving in the direction of hash based signatures.


And I want to kind of, you know, rattle the cage a little bit and say that we I would like to make an argument for considering more algebraic based signatures rather than just hash based so that we don't lose many of the properties of algebraic based signatures.


[Anna Rose] (12:16 - 12:18)
What is an example of an algebraic signature?


[Dan Boneh] (12:18 - 13:25)
Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah. For sure. For sure.


So, you know, the algebraic post-quantum systems. Of course, the prominent ones are the lattice based ones. And so, yeah, we should obviously be considering the lattice based systems.


There are a couple of others. Maybe we'll talk about them in just a second. The reason I'd like to kind of make an argument for algebraic based systems is they have a lot more structure than the hash based systems.


And the structure actually lets us do a lot of things that we can't do in the hash based world. Yeah, so there's a lot of room for innovation. Maybe just to mention a couple of things, like in the Bitcoin world is what are called adapter signatures, that brilliant idea is possible because of the algebraic structure, threshold signatures, distributed key generation, hierarchical key derivation.


All these things are possible because of the algebraic structure. And if we just stick to hash based signatures, we're kind of essentially cutting off a lot of the innovation that can happen with digital signatures. So, again, we'll talk about that in just a second.


And the last point that I'm hoping we'll get to is a couple of the cute ideas. The Google paper has a number of really cute ideas in it that actually I'd like to talk about. I don't know how many people actually read the Google paper.


[Anna Rose] (13:26 - 13:30)
You said that to me when we started and I was like, oh, yeah, I didn't. I read a summary.


[Dan Boneh] (13:31 - 13:47)
And actually, I'd say there's a couple of good, really cute ideas. And in particular, there are three ideas that I wanted to talk about. And so, yeah, so those are the four points I was hoping people can take away.


The timeline, don't rush, algebraic signatures and cute ideas in the Google paper.


[Anna Rose] (13:47 - 14:34)
Very cool. So we did, I mean, we started in on timelines, the 2029. You're saying don't put too much weight on that.


There are folks in our community who very much disagree with these early timelines who say, why are we really worried about this? Like, it's still so far off that this would become relevant threats to like specifically like ZK systems. So why are we all of a sudden scrambling to try to make these post-quantum systems?


I liked actually, it was really good clarification that 2029 is more from the security side. This is sort of like giving buffer time. But still, what is the timeline that is predicted?


And I know you kind of are saying there is none. But are we thinking 10 years? Is there any sort of ballpark?


[Dan Boneh] (14:35 - 15:13)
Yeah, I knew you're not going to leave me alone with the timeline question. Everybody just wants to know the timeline. Look, the reality is this is something that's coming.


When exactly it's coming, we don't really know. I would say just given, you know, I've been talking to a lot of the teams that are building this stuff, and there are a lot of challenges that they have to solve to get to where they want to get to. And so we can talk about some of those challenges.


Saying that it's going to be that the computer will be the shore computer will be here by 2030. It's very unlikely, very unlikely. But when you stretch it out to 2040, that's when it's starting to feel kind of uncomfortable.


[Anna Rose] (15:14 - 15:14)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (15:15 - 15:22)
And so, again, this is if you force me to say numbers. Yeah. The answer is it's N years away for an unknown value of N.


[Anna Rose] (15:22 - 15:24)
But not 50 years, you don't think?


[Dan Boneh] (15:25 - 15:38)
Okay. You know, here I have to say that one of the most depressing statements that I'm really scared of, which is the honest answer is we don't even know today. We don't really know that this is at all possible.


Ever going to work.


[Anna Rose] (15:39 - 15:39)
Oh, wow.


[Dan Boneh] (15:40 - 16:28)
Now, it's very likely that it will. All the physicists promise me that the physics is sound, the architecture is sound, the engineering is sound. It likely will work.


But then there are physics papers that say, well, who knows? Maybe there's kind of a misunderstanding of quantum mechanics and there's some reason why the universe is preventing us from from implementing these these computers. I don't believe that.


I believe we are going to get there. But I'll say the most depressing thing to me is we do all this work to transition to post-quantum systems. We pay the penalty of moving to post-quantum systems, which are much worse than the pre-quantum systems.


Wow. Not to mention that we have to move away from BLS, which kind of breaks my heart, of course. And then we wait a hundred years and there's still no quantum computer.


Then we're going to then we're going to look really, really foolish.


[Anna Rose] (16:28 - 16:28)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (16:28 - 18:41)
I mean, then then this is the most depressing thing that that can happen unless there's one silver lining, unless by trying to build this quantum computer and failing, we learn new quantum mechanics and all of a sudden, all of a sudden, you know, the new physics that we learn from that is going to give us unbounded energy or whatever. Yeah. So there is a silver lining, which is great.


I don't believe we're in that world. I believe the quantum mechanics is sound. I believe the engineering is going to get us there.


So I believe we will have a quantum computer eventually. When is I'm actually say I'm amazed at how divisive this topic has become. That is really surprising to me.


Again, it's we have to remember, we don't know the number n. It's n years away and we don't know n. So somehow the value of n has become like a crazy, divisive question.


Yeah. Is it is it five years away? Is it 10 years away?


Is it 100 years away? Everybody has opinions and they feel very strongly about those opinions. But the answer, the truth is we don't know until it's built.


We won't we won't know. Well, the other interesting thing is the implication of all this. So, like I said, I believe this is coming.


This will happen again. For some value, finite value of n. I don't want to commit to an end, but for some finite value of n.


What's interesting is, you know, the Bitcoin world, Bitcoin in some sense, its strength is that it doesn't change. And here we actually have something that's going to force Bitcoin to change. So, you know, there's a lot a lot of in the Bitcoin world.


There's a lot of resistance to this idea that, you know, we don't like change. And here we have to do we have to change something. So that's causing a lot of a lot of tension in the Bitcoin world.


Of course, let's not even talk about what to do about abandoned assets. That's like a whole other a whole other question that's causing some issues. But let's go back to the timeline issue.


So I think it is useful to kind of help maybe the audience understand a little bit about what's happening. So right now, there are kind of two leading architectures for building a quantum computer. Yeah, one is based on what are called superconducting qubits.


This is more traditional VLSI. These are complicated experiments to do. This is the approach to Google, IBM, Rigetti.


All those companies are following. These are expensive experiments. You have to have you have to cool everything down to close to absolute zero.


These are complicated experiments to do.


[Anna Rose] (18:42 - 18:52)
And basically, every time we hear or see these quantum computers with all of the wires, this is the kind of quantum computer that we're talking about, the superconductor. Yeah, it's like superconducting qubits.


[Dan Boneh] (18:53 - 18:56)
What you're what you're looking at is basically a fridge that has to cool everything down.


[Anna Rose] (18:56 - 18:56)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (18:56 - 20:08)
The other approach, which is more recent and super exciting, is probably, you know, people now think that that's probably going to lead to take us there first, is what's called the neutral atoms approach. Neutral atoms. Yeah.


So, yeah, yeah. So you're right, Anna, it's very closely related to this. So what's interesting about neutral atoms?


Let me just say that building these computers basically takes three components. Yeah, there's a laser, there's optics that split the laser beam into like, let's say, 10,000 traps, depending on how many qubits you want. And then there's a vacuum chamber where the traps actually live in.


It's kind of interesting why you need a vacuum chamber. You're using the laser, using these beams to trap atoms. And you need a vacuum chamber to make sure that like other atoms in the environment don't just come and knock the atoms out of the out of their traps.


Yeah, this is why you need a vacuum chamber. Now, interestingly, these are much simpler experiments to do than the superconducting qubits. You don't need to fabricate or maybe you don't need to fabricate complicated basics and so on.


But in the result, there are many startups that are actually following the neutral atoms approach. In fact, there's even a lab at Stanford that's now building like this summer. Just one professor is building a thousand neutral atom experiment.


Cool.


[Anna Rose] (20:09 - 20:09)
Who is that?


[Dan Boneh] (20:10 - 20:11)
That's Professor Choi at Stanford.


[Anna Rose] (20:11 - 20:23)
OK, OK, because we had Jelena Vukovic on the show last year. And I want to just understand where her research fits in this, because hers was very much to do with light and photons.


[Dan Boneh] (20:23 - 20:24)
Yeah, it's all related.


[Anna Rose] (20:24 - 20:28)
So is that in the same kind of category as this neutral atoms?


[Dan Boneh] (20:28 - 21:17)
Oh, yes, yes, yes. The photonics people are super, super happy about this because now all of a sudden this is all about splitting a laser beam into a whole bunch of other beams and moving those beams around. So what's interesting is, again, because these are much easier experiments to do, there are lots of startups that are going down the path of neutral atoms.


What I wanted to stress is, though, these are the two architectures are fundamentally different architectures. So let me just explain why that's so. So superconducting, basically, you have local connectivity, so only close qubits can interact with one another.


Whereas with neutral atoms, you can kind of move them around and have them interact with one another and then move them back into their into their locations. Yeah. OK, so you have much better connectivity with neutral atoms, which gives you more flexibility in the type of algorithms you can implement.


But because you have to move things around, neutral atoms are a lot slower than superconducting qubits, about a thousand times slower.


[Anna Rose] (21:17 - 21:18)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (21:18 - 21:29)
So in the Google paper, the claim is, if we build a quantum computer using super superconducting qubits, amazingly, their estimate is that ACDSA can be broken in roughly 20 minutes.


[Anna Rose] (21:30 - 21:36)
OK, but wait, just one one double check, because I think the way you just said it was neutral atoms was slower.


[Dan Boneh] (21:36 - 21:36)
Slower. Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (21:37 - 21:37)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (21:37 - 21:41)
So with superconducting, with superconducting, the estimate is ACDSA in 20 minutes.


[Anna Rose] (21:42 - 21:42)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (21:42 - 21:47)
With neutral atoms, the Caltech paper basically estimates about 10 days to break ACDSA.


[Anna Rose] (21:48 - 21:52)
That seems counterintuitive because you're thinking like light versus material.


[Dan Boneh] (21:52 - 24:12)
But no, no, no, no, no. I think you're thinking about a different approach. The neutral atoms approach is actually atoms.


The light is used to trap atoms. So the qubits are actually held. The information is actually held in atoms.


OK. Yeah. The photonics method is a very different method for doing quantum computing.


That I'm not I'm that I'm not going to talk about. OK, OK. And by the way, I should I should mention the Google paper came at the same time as a Caltech paper was published by Dolev and others.


They're experimental physicists. In fact, they have their own startup called Oratomic, which is super exciting. Also building this stuff.


And they're actually quite a lot, quite far along. It's really quite interesting that like in what is it? Last year, Dolev published this paper showing an experiment with four hundred and forty nine neutral atoms where they actually implemented 27 gates.


Yeah, they actually ran a 27 gate circuit. They implemented quantum error correction. They literally showed that all the components that are needed to work actually work.


So now they all they have to do, you know, all in big quotes, all they have to do is just scale that up to something like, you know, they claim twenty six thousand atoms, more likely even more than that. But just, you know, we're going from a couple of hundred to a couple of thousands. I mean, tens of thousands.


So this is why we have confidence that this is coming because it's no, it doesn't seem out of the question. And they're claiming that they're going to do the scaling pretty quickly. So then we'll see.


And then what's interesting is also their papers literally talk about the designed architecture for the computer. You know, we're going to have memory here. We're going to compute over here.


We're going to have IO over there. They literally kind of laid out the architectures for a computer. It's called a three zone architecture.


And it all seems to be coming together. So the other thing that people might worry about is can we keep these computers in coherence? They have an experiment where they actually kept the computer in coherence for two hours.


It didn't do anything. It just sat there. But it actually maintained coherence for two hours using this trick called replenishing of atoms.


And so, yeah, the components are coming together. This is why this is why people need to pay attention to this. You know, I like to say, you know, don't panic.


Don't rush. But you can't ignore this stuff. These experiments are scaling.


There was like a big, big aha moments like a year or two ago where quantum error correction was shown to work. The physical qubits were getting were getting better and better. And so, yeah, this stuff is coming.


[Anna Rose] (24:13 - 24:52)
When thinking about these kind of quantum computers, something that I and you just sort of mentioned it. I kept thinking before I started to dig into it that the quantum computer was like a single thing that you would have a computer the way we have a computer, but it would be a quantum computer. But what I understood is it's like it's a it would probably be like a component.


Like there's no memory in a quantum computer as far as I understand. Right. And you need you need like the other pieces of a computer as we understand it.


And then the quantum could be like one element. Is that correct? Is that sort of how we have to envision like a future version of a quantum computer?


And the second question is, could we ever have one in our house? Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (24:52 - 25:38)
Yeah. Yeah. I think I think that's a bit of a simplistic simplistic view.


I think you can think of the quantum part of the computer is literally a physics experiment. OK, it's an experiment that helping that's helping a classical computation. Oh, and so what's interesting, actually, this is one of the things I was going to just going to talk about is a quantum computer actually is driven by a classical computer.


So there's a huge classical computer that's sitting on the side and actually driving the quantum experiments. OK, so it's telling the quantum computer literally what it's doing, what the classical computer is doing is it's telling the the laser beams where to go. Yeah.


So it's kind of moving things around. It's turning on lasers on and off, is doing measurements and so on. So everything is orchestrated by a classical computer.


[Anna Rose] (25:38 - 25:41)
Is it also taking the result and then interpreting it?


[Dan Boneh] (25:41 - 26:11)
Not only that, it turns out for the ECDSA attack algorithm, there's a huge classical computation that has to happen once the quantum experiment is done. Yeah, we're not. Yeah, we do the quantum experiment.


We get some results. We're not done. Now we have to do a big classical computation to actually get to the discrete log.


And I actually love to talk about that a bit more. So you asked, are we ever going to have one in our house? It's interesting.


So when I talk to the physics folks that do not neutral atoms experiments, their claim is that the size of the computer is about the size of a garage.


[Anna Rose] (26:11 - 26:13)
It's a little big, but not that big.


[Dan Boneh] (26:13 - 29:25)
Well, if you remember, classical computers used to be the size of a building. True. Yeah, it took a while.


It took a while for things to miniaturise. And so, you know, just the first generation quantum computer is going to be quite large. And then, you know, then who knows?


But the fact that these things are running, they could run actually at room temperature. Well, I mean, they have to be cooled a bit, but they don't have to be cooled too much. I mean, this technology is actually coming as it's kind of important to understand.


Actually, this is I got conflicting answers here. One neutral atom team told me that everything they're building is off the shelf equipment. Like, OK, it's just putting it together, which is really hard.


Writing, running the classical computations is really that's building it is hard, but everything is off the shelf components. And another team told me, no, we're building custom components. So I can't really tell if it's if it's really just off the shelf or custom.


But the point is, these experiments are not that difficult to build. And we have a lot of startups that are actually going after that. The main challenge in building these computers is dealing with errors.


Yeah. So these are atoms that are interacting with the environment. They constantly do things you don't want them to do.


Like they you know, there are these gates that get applied to them that you don't want apply to them. And so you have to fix errors. Yeah.


So the whole game here is how to get how to reduce errors. And there are three approaches that people use to reducing errors. One approach is to build better physical qubits.


So more accurate physical qubits. And the experimentalists have been working hard and building better and better and better physical qubits to the point. OK, so the point where they're now they've gotten so good that the second approach kicks in, which is error correction.


This is what's called quantum error correction. So we build a we encode the entire computation in an error in a quantum error error correcting code. And then the error correction code, error correcting code allows us to recover from errors in the physical layer.


Now, the physical qubits have gotten so good that now quantum error correction can kick in. This was what was so exciting about the Willow experiment back in 2024. They got the physical, the superconducting physical qubits to be so good that they could demonstrate that error correction really works.


OK, so that was that was cool that that we can demonstrate the error correction works. Since then, as I said, this 449 experiment, they actually also demonstrated error correction across 27 gates. And so that works.


The third way to get to reduce errors is to shorten the computation, right? The longer your computation, the more errors you accumulate. So the third way to reduce errors is to simplify your algorithms so that the algorithms run, the computer runs faster.


And as a result, it accumulates fewer, fewer errors. The Google paper is in this third category. Yeah, it's a way to reduce the length of the computation so that you don't need as strong as many qubits to correct for errors.


OK, so hopefully this places things kind of in perspective. So the Caltech paper, the new Caltech paper is about better error correcting codes. There's a lot of papers on trying to build better and better physical qubits.


And the Google paper was about shrinking the computation size. You have the computation length. So we don't accumulate that many errors.


[Anna Rose] (29:25 - 29:29)
So these are not competing, basically, research. This is complementary.


[Dan Boneh] (29:29 - 30:55)
Totally complementary. These are three complementary approaches. By the way, let me say one more thing about quantum error correction.


This is a really cool area. So quantum error correction is all algebra. And if folks who are like into algebra and stuff, you guys should start working on quantum error correction.


This is such a purely algebraic question. What's interesting is it turns out the way these experiments work is you let the quantum computer work, meaning you kind of direct the laser beam. You move the atoms around, you make them interact with one another and so on.


And now you need to do error correction. Well, how do you do error correction? Well, you measure.


And then based on the measurement, you take some other actions. Now, it turns out that calculating what's called the decoding, calculating the actually applying the error correction code to the computation, that turns out to be a massive classical computation. Just to give you an example, the Oratomic team, they were saying that their gates will operate at, let's say, one millisecond per operation.


But the time it takes them to run the error correction is a few seconds per gate. So the classical computer is holding back the quantum computer. Oh, wow.


Which is really interesting. Because of this, actually, even NVIDIA got into this game. So NVIDIA, you know, their eyes lit up.


They said, wow, there's a big computing problem here. We have computers, right? And so even NVIDIA built kernels.


They have now GPUs whose whole purpose is just to do quantum error correction. Wow. Yeah.


So it's kind of cool how the industry is coming together.


[Anna Rose] (30:55 - 30:55)
Oh, my gosh.


[Dan Boneh] (30:55 - 31:08)
To make all of this work. So like for your listeners who like algebra, you don't you don't have to be a physics experimentalist to help in this area. Go work on quantum error correction codes.


They're so they're so cool and there's so many open problems to work on there.


[Anna Rose] (31:08 - 31:18)
So cool. I did not know the NVIDIA connection, though. That's I mean, this is just sort of like if if this A.I. experiment doesn't work, there's always quantum, right?


[Dan Boneh] (31:18 - 31:25)
That's right. That's right. Your podcast could could turn into a quantum error correction podcast.


Now, I'm just kidding. Stick with your knowledge.


[Anna Rose] (31:26 - 31:31)
OK, should we dive into the algebraic signatures now? That was, I know, one of the points you wanted to cover.


[Dan Boneh] (31:31 - 31:55)
Oh, yeah, yeah. I would love to talk about that. But actually, first, can we maybe talk a little bit about the Google paper?


I think there are some there are some cute ideas in the paper that I just want wanted people to to be familiar with. And so, yeah, we can do that. We can do that briefly.


Yeah. So let's see. So let's start, first of all, with kind of the elephant in the room, which is the ZK proof.


So what is the ZK proof? What did the proof actually prove?


[Anna Rose] (31:55 - 32:14)
Yeah, true. As I understood it, it was like the algorithm that they had discovered something like kind of what you were talking about, reducing the computation. Now I kind of have a bit of a better context.


They didn't want to release the algorithm. And so they used a ZKP to prove that the algorithm did what it said it did without revealing anything else.


[Dan Boneh] (32:14 - 33:36)
That's exactly right. But let's let's give a bit more detail here, because I think it's kind of interesting. So when you look at Shor's algorithm to compute discrete log, the hardest part of the algorithm, surprisingly, turns out to be a classical computation.


Yeah. And let me tell you what that is. The hardest part of the algorithm is basically you are trying to compute a discrete log of, say, h base g.


So h and g are two points on an elliptic curve. You're trying to compute the discrete log of h base g. The hardest part of the algorithm is computing x times g plus y times h for certain integers x and y.


OK, OK. So that's just a classical computation that the quantum circuit has to implement. And what we want to do is basically come up with the shortest possible circuit, the fastest possible quantum circuit to do this classical computation.


And so what the Google paper does is basically it discovered a better algorithm to to do this classical computation. Yeah, simple. X times g plus y times h.


I want to point out that that computation, if you if you think about it a little bit and it's actually we explained it in the paper, it turns out that computation is literally just 28 elliptic curve additions, 28 elliptic curve additions. So the whole thing that the hardest part of Shor's algorithm is computing 28 elliptic curve additions.


[Anna Rose] (33:37 - 33:37)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (33:37 - 34:34)
Yeah, amazingly. OK, so what what does your knowledge proof shows is that there exists a quantum circuit that given two elliptic curve points will add them up using only what is a 2.7 million quantum gates. These are called Toffoli gates.


So it's a it's a classical computation that is implemented using quantum gates and correctly implements elliptic curve addition. So they have this quantum gate simulator. It's called Kickmix that that they've built.


And they loaded their circuit into Kickmix. And the proof actually shows that the circuit that they loaded, the circuit is the witness. It's a secret data.


OK. They ran the simulator inside of the inside of the ZKVM. And the simulator said, yes, if you use this circuit that was loaded to add up 9000 random points, it does the job correctly.


OK, so that's what the proof proves.


[Anna Rose] (34:35 - 34:54)
I now am. So the reduction of the computation that Google found or this algorithm does, just to be clear, this is not like, you know, you talked about how there's the classical computer and then the quantum computer. Where does this live?


Does this live in the classical computer interacting with the quantum or is it within the quantum computer itself?


[Dan Boneh] (34:55 - 35:31)
Yeah, it's all it's all kind of together. So what happens is, you know, you implement your quantum circuit the way, for example, to do elliptic curve additions. The way you implement your quantum circuit is by having the classical computer look at the individual gates.


And for each gate, it tells the classical computer, tells the photonics that, you know, the optical apparatus to behave in a particular way. Yeah. You know, move the beams there, move the beams here, depending on what the gates are.


So you really go gate by gate. And then the classical computer basically programmes the optical apparatus to do the right thing.


[Anna Rose] (35:32 - 35:33)
And the QuickMix is a simulation?


[Dan Boneh] (35:34 - 35:36)
QuickMix, yes. That's a so that's a simulator.


[Anna Rose] (35:36 - 35:37)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (35:37 - 35:41)
That basically loads the description of a quantum circuit.


[Anna Rose] (35:41 - 35:41)
Yes.


[Dan Boneh] (35:41 - 35:50)
And then basically, if it's if it's classically simulatable, which in this case it is, it goes ahead and simulates it and checks that it did it did the right thing.


[Anna Rose] (35:50 - 36:03)
I see. And so the ZKVM and the proof was kind of a both sides. It was like that if you use this on the traditional computer side of things within the simulator, that you will get the outcome that you're looking for.


[Dan Boneh] (36:03 - 36:32)
Exactly. Exactly. So the ZKVM literally executes the QuickMix quantum circuit simulator.


Cool. Which circuit is being is executed. That's the secret witness, which is kind of loaded into the simulator and shown to run to run correctly.


So that was the ZK proof. Now, there's an important lesson here, which, again, is important for your audience to hear, which is ZK. So the QuickMix simulator was built as an in-house tool.


It was never designed to operate in adversarial environments.


[Anna Rose] (36:32 - 36:32)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (36:32 - 36:57)
And as we know, ZK circuits have to work in adversarial environments because the attacker is going to try to forge a witness. So to do this, as you can imagine, this was a pretty massive computation. They had to use to use GPUs and all that to generate this proof.


And so when they translated their QuickMix simulator to Rust so they can run it inside of a ZKVM, they tried to simplify the code. And one way to simplify the code is they removed some checks.


[Anna Rose] (36:58 - 36:58)
Ah.


[Dan Boneh] (36:59 - 37:10)
Well, the minute you remove checks, there is a way for an attacker to load a fake witness, a fake circuit. Uh-oh. It would do the same thing, but doesn't actually.


It's not a valid quantum circuit. And so, yeah, so the Trail of Bits guy in particular.


[Anna Rose] (37:10 - 37:12)
This is what I was going to ask because I heard.


[Dan Boneh] (37:12 - 37:12)
Yeah, yeah, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (37:12 - 37:13)
They kind of.


[Dan Boneh] (37:13 - 37:14)
This is really important to remember.


[Anna Rose] (37:14 - 37:21)
Went backward. I mean, the way they described it was that they almost like unravelled the secret because of the change, I guess.


[Dan Boneh] (37:22 - 37:30)
No, no, not unravelled the secret. What Keegan Ryan at Trail of Bits was able to do, he was able to basically write down an invalid quantum circuit.


[Anna Rose] (37:30 - 37:31)
And still have it.


[Dan Boneh] (37:31 - 37:37)
That the simulator would just ingest and run and confused it into thinking that it did the right thing, even though it's an invalid circuit.


[Anna Rose] (37:38 - 37:45)
Because this is not the actual simulator, like the actual simulator that's in-house was not put fully into it.


[Dan Boneh] (37:45 - 38:29)
Yeah, so basically, you know, the simulator had to be fixed and had to include all these extra checks. And by the way, Keegan Ryan did a phenomenal job there. So kudos to him for doing this work.


And yeah, and then the proofs were quickly regenerated. This was within like a day or two. The proofs were regenerated.


So it's OK. Now the ZK proof is correct. There's an important lesson here to remember is, you know, when implementing ZK proofs, you have to make sure that the circuit you're running inside the ZKVM or the programme in the ZKVM is bulletproof.


Yeah, it's secure. The other point I want to make is I had hoped that, you know, I'm a researcher. I like open academic research.


I would have actually been happier if the circuit had been made public.


[Anna Rose] (38:29 - 38:29)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (38:30 - 38:52)
And so I think now there's a challenge for our community. You know, go and download the Kickmix simulator. It's actually pretty simple.


It's not it's pretty easy to use and figure out what the circuit is. Yeah, somebody should. This is like a great puzzle.


Go figure out what the circuit is. Yeah. All you have to do is figure out how to add two elliptic curve points using Toffoli gates.


Yeah, that's it.


[Anna Rose] (38:52 - 38:57)
Do you know why they weren't able to release it? Like, why did it have to be proprietary?


[Dan Boneh] (38:58 - 40:27)
OK, this is this is this is a good question. So what I'll say is this. Let's just say that Google operates under certain constraints and their only option was either to make this discovery and say nothing or to make this discovery and prove it in zero knowledge.


Those were the only options that they could do under the constraints they were operating under. And this actually brings an important point, because they often say that. In fact, when I talk to the other companies that are building this stuff, they often say that at some point, you know, this this progress might actually happen not under the public eye.


So, you know, it could be that like we get to 2035 and for some reason, let's say after 2030, we don't hear we don't hear any progress in quantum computing, but a lot of progress is being done. It's just not in the public eye. And that actually something that is quite concerning.


That is something we need to be worried about in that the fact that we're not hearing about progress doesn't mean that there isn't progress being made to me. That is, I have to say, that is quite heartbreaking. And it's not only heartbreaking is there's about a bit a bit of risk in it in that, you know, one country could get it before other countries, for example.


I'll say it more or maybe more poetically in that there's a possibility of a quantum Silicon Valley emerging. We want quantum Silicon Valley to happen in California, not elsewhere. Yeah.


But if California companies don't talk about their progress, then it's probably going to happen elsewhere.


[Anna Rose] (40:27 - 40:28)
Oh, yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (40:28 - 41:50)
So there's I think there's a policy aspect there as well. I hope this is all developed in the open and that at least we we know about the progress that's being made and the progress is not is not kept in the dark. Oh, yeah.


So that was only one idea on the Google paper. So much for being so much for being brief. Yeah.


So much for being brief. The other, you know, maybe I'll just quickly mention one other idea. It's very cute, actually.


I really like this idea. So remember, I told you that the hardest part of Shor's algorithm is computing X times G plus Y times H. OK.


Now, interestingly, in Bitcoin, for example, G is fixed forever. G doesn't change. But H is actually dependent on your on your public key, on your Bitcoin address.


OK. All right. So really, you can you can compute X times G ahead of time.


We call this priming the computer. And then once the public key becomes available, all you have to do is compute Y times H. So in some sense, this is like an easy factor of two speed up.


So that when you reveal your public key, now the algorithm can run twice as fast to compute the discrete log of the public key. Now, there's a really bizarre coincidence there in that we're superconducting qubits. I said it takes 20 minutes to compute elliptic curve discrete log.


Divide that by two. Now it takes 10 minutes. And what is 10 minutes?


10 minutes is the Bitcoin block rate.


[Anna Rose] (41:50 - 41:50)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (41:52 - 42:08)
So that has all sorts of implications to what are called online attacks that as soon as the public key is revealed, immediately the attacker can kind of try to run the discrete log algorithm. If the computer is primed, they might be able to break it in 10 minutes. And then, you know.


[Anna Rose] (42:09 - 42:16)
What would that mean, though? Would that mean like before the user even can notice, before the miner can even like what would that actually mean?


[Dan Boneh] (42:17 - 42:23)
Yeah, yeah. OK, this is again, we're going into Bitcoin land here. What this means is that the user submits their transaction to the mempool.


[Anna Rose] (42:23 - 42:24)
Yes.


[Dan Boneh] (42:24 - 42:34)
Before the transaction is included into a block, an attacker could break the discrete log, issue a competing transaction and move that into the block.


[Anna Rose] (42:34 - 42:39)
And this is the concern. I mean, just going back to like sort of why this matters to the Bitcoin folks.


[Dan Boneh] (42:39 - 42:41)
OK, this is one concern.


[Anna Rose] (42:42 - 42:42)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (42:42 - 42:55)
Yeah, this basically would mean that putting transactions in the mempool in Bitcoin is going to be risky when this happens, if this happens. Probably that would mean that people would stop putting transactions in the mempool.


[Anna Rose] (42:55 - 42:55)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (42:56 - 43:09)
And they'd have to move to other methods unless Bitcoin actually adjusts and moves to post-quantum mechanisms before then. And of course, now there's a lot of discussion in the Bitcoin community on how to do that exactly. For sure.


[Anna Rose] (43:10 - 43:29)
And we actually we had Project 11 on some time ago who talked about exactly that migration path and the challenge of doing, of basically getting everyone to change, sort of to upgrade their accounts, to upgrade their signature schemes, basically, and how unlikely or hard that would be to do en masse in a decentralised place.


[Dan Boneh] (43:30 - 44:03)
Yeah, actually, I have to say this is kind of one of the reasons why, you know, I say don't panic, don't rush, but don't ignore in that, you know, we need to take our time to decide what to do. But we also need to give people, I don't know, a couple of years to actually implement the transition. And so, again, if we start now, let's say by 2030, we finalise our plans, we give people five years, 2035, you know, that kind of gives us a bit of a bit of comfort zone.


You know, if we all the timelines get pushed beyond 2040, you know, now we're kind of getting into uncomfortable territory.


[Anna Rose] (44:04 - 44:08)
Have you tracked what Lean, like the Lean Ethereum work and what Justin's...


[Dan Boneh] (44:08 - 44:09)
Oh my God, yeah, that's beautiful.


[Anna Rose] (44:09 - 44:12)
I mean, Justin's a co-author on there, too. So I know you guys are definitely in touch.


[Dan Boneh] (44:12 - 44:30)
Beautiful work. Yeah. So the Ethereum community is there.


They're actually taking pretty aggressive steps to to, you know, address this issue. Really interesting stuff. So all their Lean VM, their Lean signatures, they're very, very, very cool ideas go into that.


So I'm quite excited about what they're what they're doing.


[Anna Rose] (44:30 - 44:42)
Nice. Yeah, we did a six part series that I'll link to in the show notes. But if anyone wants to hear more about what they're working on in their case, like the this 10 minute issue, like it's different, right?


[Dan Boneh] (44:42 - 44:46)
It's not it's not it's not as far less relevant to Ethereum. Got it.


[Anna Rose] (44:46 - 44:51)
Dan, did we cover all three points, all three cool ideas from Google?


[Dan Boneh] (44:51 - 45:07)
Yes, actually, the third one, I think we already we already talked about the fact that these superconducting qubits might might break discrete log quite quickly. So the third one we talked about. So, yeah, so that's kind of the one of the points in the Google paper.


There's a couple of other ideas there that maybe I would ask people to maybe just read the paper.


[Anna Rose] (45:09 - 45:12)
Actually read it, not just put it in an LLM and get it summarised.


[Dan Boneh] (45:12 - 45:13)
Exactly. Exactly. OK.


[Anna Rose] (45:15 - 46:01)
Let's sort of return then to the algebraic signatures. This I mean, you had sort of highlighted one like the lattice based work. We've actually covered that a fair bit here.


You're talking about potential post quantum signature schemes, right? Like so things that you would want to migrate to. And this is this is the part where I guess because I come from ZK land, this is the part where I feel most sort of security fearful.


Because these new systems are so new, like if you want to start an implementation like you have to know it, first of all, it won't happen overnight. And yet you need to start at some point. So kind of like at what point are these systems battle tested enough that you would feel comfortable doing a migration of this level?


[Dan Boneh] (46:01 - 47:40)
My God, Anna, that is such a great point. So so let's let's discuss that. I think that's a really important point.


I think the question you're asking is this. So we have hash based signatures, which are just based on hash functions. Which hash functions is an interesting question in its own right.


Maybe we'll talk about that a bit more. These hash based systems also, they're not so simple. Yeah, I mean, it takes a bit of work to implement them.


And there could always be bugs. Who knows? These libraries might not be battle tested enough.


Bugs are always a threat. And then we have algebraic signatures. Lattice signatures are an example of the algebraic algebraic signatures.


And I think the question you asked is great. Like, how do we know when these lattice based signatures are quantum secure? Yeah.


Right. Maybe we do all this work and then it turns out they're not quantum secure. In fact, like a year ago, you know, there was actually a paper claiming to break all this stuff, a quantum algorithm to break all this stuff.


Turned out, fortunately, turned out to be incorrect. But yeah, these are new, relatively new questions. And how do we know that these things are secure?


So my answer to this is, first of all, as we said, algebraic signatures have a lot more structure that enables a lot more innovation, like threshold signatures and distributed key generation, hierarchical key derivation, all this innovation that happened with algebraic properties of the signatures. So I think your question is exactly right. Like, how do we know that these things are secure?


How do we know that we're not going to harm security of the chain? So the answer to that is actually quite simple. And this has already been deployed.


The answer to that is what's called a hybrid signature. OK, so what is a hybrid signature? You literally take ECDSA, as you do today, and you concatenate it to a lattice-based signature.


So you do both.


[Anna Rose] (47:40 - 47:46)
So you get both secure. You get sort of the security of the the first, even if it is that.


[Dan Boneh] (47:46 - 47:51)
I would say I would say it is you're provably not degrading security. OK, you're at least as secure as ECDSA.


[Anna Rose] (47:51 - 47:51)
OK.


[Dan Boneh] (47:52 - 48:21)
The reason this is not a crazy proposal is because these these lattice-based signatures are pretty big. Even the weak Falcon one is over over 600 bytes. So ECDSA is like, you know, 30, you know, under, under the coding, let's say, let's say 32 bytes or under 60 bytes or so.


And so it's not a significant fraction of the signature size. So adding, tacking on an ECDSA to a lattice-based signature is not that expensive from from a space point of view.


[Anna Rose] (48:21 - 48:31)
OK, I see. I'm surprised that the security follows over, though. Like, I thought maybe by combining them, you degrade the security.


But you're saying no, no, no.


[Dan Boneh] (48:31 - 48:33)
OK. No, no. The attacker has to break both of them.


[Anna Rose] (48:33 - 48:33)
Right. OK.


[Dan Boneh] (48:34 - 49:09)
So the point is, before before a quantum computer is available, you're as secure as ECDSA. And after a quantum computer is available, you know, ECDSA is no longer relevant. But at least you have your your your quantum signature to to fall back onto.


So so this argument, the security argument against these algebraic systems, I think is a valid argument. But all that means is that we should just deploy them in hybrid mode. And I should again, it's very important to understand that this is not a new idea.


The Internet has already transitioned to post-quantum. You know, the communication between you and me right now is already post-quantum secure.


[Anna Rose] (49:10 - 49:13)
I didn't know that. And is it but isn't it is it hash based or is it?


[Dan Boneh] (49:13 - 49:15)
No, it's not. It's hybrid.


[Anna Rose] (49:15 - 49:15)
It's hybrid.


[Dan Boneh] (49:15 - 49:21)
So actually, the communication between you and me right now is protected by elliptic cryptography and lattice cryptography.


[Anna Rose] (49:21 - 49:21)
Wow.


[Dan Boneh] (49:22 - 50:12)
Together. Yeah. So even the the web, you know, Google and Cloudflare and all those folks, they were too afraid to just deploy lattice cryptography by itself.


So they went with a hybrid system, which is the right thing to do. And it's not unreasonable to say also that the blockchain should follow that approach as well. Now, what I see in a lot of a lot of chains, what they are starting to do or some chains, what they're starting to do is they're giving people a choice.


You know, you can kind of sign using multiple signatures and we're going to let you choose which combination of signatures you want to do yourself. You know, if history has told us anything, this is a massive foot gun. Right.


Developers will will get this wrong one way or another. Users will get this wrong one way or another. It's much better to sort of enshrine a signature scheme that by default, by construction, by design, is a hybrid signature scheme that does both both signatures.


[Anna Rose] (50:13 - 50:13)
Interesting.


[Dan Boneh] (50:14 - 50:22)
Yeah. Again, this is like my opinion. I'm not, you know, of course, engineers are free to do whatever they choose.


But this seems like a safe way to go.


[Anna Rose] (50:23 - 50:36)
Cool. I have two questions. One is both are a little bit like outside.


One is when were the lattices deployed on the Internet? Because I actually just didn't know that. So I'm curious, like what era are we talking about?


Like the 90s?


[Dan Boneh] (50:36 - 51:11)
No, no, no, no. Heaven forbid. More recent.


No, no, no. So the Google did the first experiments, like if I remember correctly, in the mid 2010s. OK.


And then Chrome adopted. This is the name for the Cypherspec is 25519MLChem. If I remember correctly, Chrome adopted that in the last, I want to say in the last two years.


OK, so quite recent. And then Cloudflare had to adopt it as well because you need both the browser and the server to adopt it. And so they did that as well.


And yeah, these days, when you look, I mean, I wish I could bring up a window here and just show you.


[Anna Rose] (51:11 - 51:12)
It's a hybrid.


[Dan Boneh] (51:12 - 51:13)
Yeah, it's a hybrid scheme.


[Anna Rose] (51:14 - 51:24)
I wonder, like, if there's ever new schemes that come out, will we just have like hybrid three way? Like the all of the different kind of cryptographic systems layered on top of one another?


[Dan Boneh] (51:24 - 51:25)
OK, this this gets expensive.


[Anna Rose] (51:25 - 51:25)
That's the limitation.


[Dan Boneh] (51:26 - 51:39)
Yeah, yeah, yeah. The interesting thing is lattice signatures are kind of already big. So tacking on an ECDSA is like, you know, it's like taking a bus and tacking on an ant to it.


You know, it's not it's not doesn't add that much to the overall length.


[Anna Rose] (51:39 - 51:40)
Easy.


[Dan Boneh] (51:40 - 51:42)
OK, maybe not an ant, but, you know, a football.


[Anna Rose] (51:42 - 51:44)
OK, something that won't weigh it down.


[Dan Boneh] (51:45 - 51:47)
Yeah, something that won't make it that much longer. Exactly. Makes sense.


[Anna Rose] (51:47 - 52:15)
OK, the other question, and this is quite out of left field, possibly as you were talking about these things. So, yeah, we were talking about security. I mean, what kind of flashed in my mind were like isogenies.


This is I'm just curious. Like we're first of all, we're or are isogenies post-quantum. And as far as I understood, like there was a lot of work in that direction.


But then I don't know if it's paused or if it's sort of like there were some, you know, some fundamental things seems to have been broken around it.


[Dan Boneh] (52:15 - 55:14)
OK, so, you know, I'm going to zoom out just for a second, because I think I think it's important to kind of draw a bigger picture here. So remember, we said don't rush the transition. I think actually NIST rushed things a little bit and then they standardised their signature schemes a little too early.


The post-quantum signature schemes a little too early. So they standardised MLDSA, they standardised Falcon and they standardised a hashbase signature. Now, since then, they realised actually that they standardised these things a little too early.


And so they have another call for additional signature schemes. Yeah, and that's actually a process that's still continuing. And in that other call, there are other signature schemes, post-quantum signatures that are being considered.


And so let me give you an example. So you asked about isogenies. Well, that is actually one of the candidates in this additional call.


They made it past round two. The scheme is called SKI-Sign. And the cool thing about SKI-Sign is it's really quite short.


It's 224 bytes. So remember, pre-quantum signatures are like under 100 bytes, let's say 60 bytes, depending on BLS or ECDSA. SKI-Sign is 224 bytes.


Yeah, so not that much longer. But in that call, there are other signature schemes. There's a lattice-based signature scheme called HAWQ that actually addresses many of the complaints on Falcon.


So HAWQ is a pretty interesting signature scheme that would likely be added to our portfolio of post-quantum signatures. And then there's a bunch of other signatures using other techniques that also result in fairly long signatures. So you ask about SKI-Sign, should they be deployed today?


It's kind of a tricky question, I have to say. Probably the general consensus is very cool, but probably we want to wait a few years for more cryptanalysis. The issue with SKI-Sign is twofold.


One, the key exchange version of isogeny-based schemes called Cyc, that was actually broken very badly. Yeah, it turned out there was a classical attack. What scared us about this is that that classical attack was not based on a new theorem.


There was already a theorem well-known in the algebraic geometry community that just the cryptographers, us cryptographers didn't know about. And that theorem kind of applied and broke the key exchange mechanism. So the issue is isogenies use sort of very cool math.


I love this, it's very, very cool math, but it's not clear if the crypto community has yet absorbed enough of this cool math to be 100% confident that there isn't another theorem lurking in the background there. And so we probably, those are wonderful schemes, they're short, maybe their performance is not as great as the latest ones, but we probably need to wait a few more years, that is quite a while before they actually get adopted. But yeah, but the other algebraic schemes, like I mentioned, the latest ones, like including this new one, Hawk, that's being proposed, that's on this track to become a standard are quite interesting.


[Anna Rose] (55:15 - 55:40)
As you're describing this, I'm just thinking about, you know, some of these new hacks or, you know, systems being broken all over the place as LLMs are starting to be deployed into this world of security. And I just wonder if we can like speed run some of these battle testing using that. Have you seen that emerging yet?


Like, have you seen audits or, I mean, like mathematical audits of some of these proposals yet?


[Dan Boneh] (55:40 - 56:18)
Yeah, yeah, absolutely, of course. So, you know, LLM, so, okay, fine. So we're switching, I guess we made it this far without mentioning AI, right?


Now we better, we can't, we can't, I guess. These days you can't have a conversation without talking about AI. So these new models, A, they're great at doing proofs.


So in principle, one could take an implementation of these new schemes and try to generate a proof that the implementation actually matches the specification of the scheme. And that actually is a fantastic idea. In fact, I think the area of formal methods is going to have a golden age right now.


[Anna Rose] (56:18 - 56:18)
Because of that.


[Dan Boneh] (56:18 - 56:29)
Because these LLMs are so good at writing lean, writing lean proofs and so on. So interestingly, there's a connection to zero knowledge there. I don't know if you want to switch gears to talk a little bit about applications of zero knowledge here.


[Anna Rose] (56:30 - 56:38)
Sure, I mean, the other things we wanted to cover on this show is proximity prize, but I think one of them was ZK and AI. So should we switch it around?


[Dan Boneh] (56:38 - 57:01)
Up to you. Let's do it. I'm a driver.


Yeah, let's do it, let's do it. Yeah, yeah, yeah. So this question about using AI for, A, for writing code, B, for testing code, and C, for proving code.


All of this is happening, even in the ZK space, right? I think you, maybe you even had some guests who were working on using LLMs to find bugs and to do proofs.


[Anna Rose] (57:01 - 57:28)
I mean, we did, so we had audit, we did an interview with ZK Security, where they've created, I mean, this is last year, so I'm sure it's very different now, but they had created a whole team of security auditors using different LLMs to check each other's work, but that was really looking at implementations. What I'm thinking now is like, what about these, just sort of like the proofs or the, where it's still sort of in theoretical realm, it hasn't been implemented yet. And I don't know if I've covered that so clearly.


[Dan Boneh] (57:28 - 59:50)
Well, there actually have been stories about that too. I mean, it turns out LLMs are quite good at finding bugs in papers. So there have actually been a couple of stories now where using people unravelled some incorrect statements in papers using LLMs. So that's pretty interesting. But let's talk about the first part you were discussing. So, you know, Mythos, or Mysos, however it's called, came out, and one of the things that Anthropic says is really good at finding bugs. So yeah, so I've been talking to a lot of my RID teaming friends who do have access to Mythos, and apparently it is quite remarkable.


Like you can give it very high level prompts. You know, I've heard there's a zero day in this and that code, go build an exploit, and it just, don't even find it, just go build an exploit. And it just finds it and builds an exploit.


It's pretty wild. So interestingly, what this means is of course, overall, it's kind of interesting. The press is interpreting this as bad news.


I interpret it as great news. Because that, yeah, exactly. That means that, you know, when we ship out a proof system now, you know, we can use Mythos to test if there are bugs in this proof system and make sure it's correct.


And in fact, people in the community have been doing that quite successfully, which is fantastic. What's interesting though is, okay, so let's say you're shipping some number theory library. You can use Mythos to find bugs in it and fix them so that when you ship it, you know that it's correct.


The problem is, in six months, Anthropic is gonna come up with the next model, even smarter than Mythos, and it's gonna find more bugs. And six months later, they're gonna come up with the next model and it's gonna find more bugs. And so now we kind of have a bit of a problem in that we have to constantly keep running these models against our software and we have to constantly be patching the bugs that they find so when are we gonna have time to write new software?


We're just gonna be patching bugs all day long. And so because of this, one thing, one way out of this is actually, by the way, I should say that these models can also help us fix the bugs. They're not as good at finding bugs, so they're good on both fronts.


But one way out of this loop, out of this cycle, is actually formal methods. So when you build a number theory library, you can actually provide a proof that the number theory library implements what you expect it to implement. When you need to do multiplication, it does multiplication correctly.


When you need to do division, it does division correctly. So it doesn't matter how smart the LLM model is, the library is guaranteed to work.


[Anna Rose] (59:50 - 59:50)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (59:50 - 1:00:04)
Yeah, so that's what a formal method proof would do. Great, how do we generate these formal methods, these formal method proofs? Well, we write them in, there are a couple of languages, but we really like Lean.


So you must have heard that people write these proofs in Lean, and the cool thing.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:04 - 1:00:12)
We did an episode on this, well, we did an episode actually on a programme called Acorn. Oh, yes, yes, I love Acorn, it's great. It sort of is competing with Lean.


[Dan Boneh] (1:00:12 - 1:00:16)
Acorn is a little bit at a different level. Yeah, but yeah, it's a pretty cool tool.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:16 - 1:00:18)
We talked about Lean in that, so we learned a little about it.


[Dan Boneh] (1:00:18 - 1:00:42)
Oh, yeah, yeah, great, great, exactly. So people write these proofs in Lean to prove that the library works correctly. Interestingly, the models can actually do the proofs for you.


In fact, the models can actually generate the Lean code that implements the library, prove that the Lean code is correct, and then a compiler can compile from Lean to C. So now we're guaranteed that as long as the compiler doesn't have bugs in it, the C code that we end up with is correct.


[Anna Rose] (1:00:42 - 1:00:45)
Should be good, so the implementation all of a sudden is good, okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:00:45 - 1:00:53)
Yeah, so formal method, this is gonna be a golden age for formal methods, and not surprisingly, there's a whole bunch of startups going down that path. What's the ZK angle?


[Anna Rose] (1:00:53 - 1:00:55)
Exactly, where does the ZK come in?


[Dan Boneh] (1:00:55 - 1:01:35)
Cool, great question, great question. Okay, well, these proofs that the code runs correctly, they're actually pretty long proofs. Okay.


These are not simple proofs. And so, well, do we have a tool to compress proofs? Maybe.


Maybe, yeah, these are exactly called snarks, yeah. So that's one aspect where snarks come in, the LLMs will generate this complicated Lean proof, now we can run a snark on it, get a short snark, that now whoever wants to run the code, all they have to do is just verify the snark and not verify the original Lean proof. There's another angle to it, which is to verify the Lean proof, you actually have to have the source code of the library.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:36 - 1:01:39)
Of the Lean, or of the library you're trying to prove?


[Dan Boneh] (1:01:40 - 1:02:30)
Yeah, yeah, so exactly, if the code is implemented originally in Lean, you would need that source code to verify that the proof, that implementation is correct. Well, the company that's selling you the software, they might not want to reveal their source code, that's their proprietary data, right? And so now, we need a zero-knowledge proof to prove that the code that you are running came from certain Lean code that does satisfy the specification.


Wow. Yeah, so not only do we use snarks for compression, we also use snarks for zero-knowledge to hide the original source code. So we actually wrote a, we have a system on this, we wrote a paper on this, it's called ZK-PI.


Cool. This is with Alex Ozdemir and Evan Loeffer. Yeah, so I hope that people build on, this is a cool application for zero-knowledge proofs, which is to prove that you have a Lean proof of something, both for compression and for zero-knowledge.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:31 - 1:03:15)
This is kind of a big, this was a conversation on our last episode, 399, where we were talking about whether or not, like, the ZKML story, I mean, that started in our community in 2023, and there was a very split, like, there was like two or three ways that we saw ZK being used to prove something about inference, to prove something about output. You know, it was like, I feel though now we've heard about more nuanced places that ZK would exist, like ZK, like AI watermarking using ZK. We have, you know, what you just described of like doing, kind of like to keep part of something where the AI is accelerating it, but you want to keep part of it still private and provable.


[Dan Boneh] (1:03:15 - 1:03:20)
Like for example, the source code, you want to keep the source code secrets, but you want to prove that the source code satisfies the specification.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:21 - 1:03:32)
That's interesting. Although I guess that could be for anything. It's not really an AI case.


That could just be like, anytime you want to keep your proprietary code private, which is kind of what Google was doing too, with that paper.


[Dan Boneh] (1:03:33 - 1:03:39)
Yeah, yeah, actually. So the, exactly, exactly. So people have used this actually for, for example, for what's called a zero knowledge proof of exploit.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:40 - 1:03:40)
Yeah, okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:03:40 - 1:03:51)
Suppose I have an exploit on your system. I don't want to tell you what the exploit is, but I want to prove to you that I have the exploit. Yeah, so there's been a, there's actually a whole DARPA programme on how do we do zero knowledge proofs of exploits.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:52 - 1:03:52)
Wow.


[Dan Boneh] (1:03:52 - 1:03:55)
And that is a kind of a pretty cool application of ZK.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:56 - 1:04:01)
I feel like, sounds familiar. Have we talked, I don't know, maybe I've heard about this before, but it's good to hear again.


[Dan Boneh] (1:04:01 - 1:04:44)
Yeah, I don't know. So the, I would say that what Google did with zero knowledge is an example of a zero knowledge proof of exploit. Wow.


We have a proof that we have a short quantum circuit. We're just going to prove it to you in zero knowledge. Interesting.


It's an example of a zero knowledge proof of exploit. Yeah, and I guess the ZK ML community has been very focused on ZK for inference. Yeah, so that has a role to play too.


That's kind of a more direct application of ZK. But I think there are all these other connections between AI and ZK, in particular, if the AI gives you a proof, you want to give a zero knowledge proof of the existence of a proof, and that is a good area. You know that ZK is also playing a role in post-quantum, right?


That I'm sure you know that.


[Anna Rose] (1:04:44 - 1:04:54)
We, I mean, that we mostly have talked about the post-quantum ZK systems, but what do you mean? Like ZK in the lattice-based stuff, or?


[Dan Boneh] (1:04:54 - 1:05:02)
Well, let's say that, let's say that my ECDSA key was derived from some seed phrase using a hash function.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:02 - 1:05:02)
Yeah, yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (1:05:02 - 1:05:16)
Yeah, using what's called BIP32. When ECDSA, so the way this works is I use a seed phrase, the seed phrase is used to derive my secret key, and my secret key is used to derive my ECDSA public key. Yeah.


When ECDSA stops being secure.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:16 - 1:05:17)
And you need to do a migration.


[Dan Boneh] (1:05:17 - 1:05:33)
And you need to, well, before you do the migration, I can't use my ECDSA private key anymore because the attacker has my ECDSA private key. So the way I prove that a certain asset is mine is by giving a ZK proof that I know the seed phrase that was used to generate a secret key.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:33 - 1:05:34)
Because they don't have that.


[Dan Boneh] (1:05:34 - 1:05:35)
Like that's- They don't have that.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:35 - 1:05:38)
The part, yes. I think we did cover that once, yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (1:05:38 - 1:06:08)
Oh, cool, cool. Yeah, the hash function is post-quantum secure. So going from secret key to seed phrase is something the attacker can't do.


So I can still get control of my assets using these ZK proofs. So these ideas are kind of floating around, and there was a paper from Mistin that kind of pushed this. I think actually, originally, this is due to some tweet from Vitalik, like everything else in our field.


Yeah, so yeah, this idea has been going around, and maybe this is also a way to do post-quantum security in the case of a catastrophe.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:09 - 1:06:41)
Since we're on the topic of ZK applications in general, are there any other exotic ZK applications that you've seen? Like, just to give you a sense for what we've seen, like ZKID is very developed. It's like now being integrated into all sorts of systems.


ZK private transfers, private tokens, that's sort of making a resurgence. Not necessarily like new concept there, but it's definitely gaining some popularity. I feel like every time I have you on, you and your students are working on some sort of edge cases.


Are there any others that are on your mind?


[Dan Boneh] (1:06:41 - 1:06:42)
Edge cases, thank you.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:43 - 1:06:46)
No, no, no, I don't mean edge cases. I mean, edge cases today that become really relevant in the future.


[Dan Boneh] (1:06:46 - 1:06:49)
Mainstream, become mainstream later, yeah, good, good. I like that better.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:49 - 1:06:52)
No, you're indie. It's the indie rock ZK applications.


[Dan Boneh] (1:06:52 - 1:07:09)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, maybe I'll mention one. So, you know how we always like to think out about kind of new cryptographic primitives that we need?


Well, I think even on the very first time that we did one of these podcasts, I guess we talked about obfuscation and IO.


[Anna Rose] (1:07:09 - 1:07:12)
Yeah, I think that was the first time I ever heard about it.


[Dan Boneh] (1:07:12 - 1:07:59)
Yeah, yeah, that's probably needed in a blockchain space. We don't have it yet, hopefully in the future. There's another one that actually is closely related actually to obfuscation and IO, but it's a little different.


It's called witness encryption. Maybe, I imagine many of your listeners have heard of witness encryption. So, with witness encryption, what happens is I can encrypt to a public statement and you can decrypt if you know the corresponding witness.


So, let me give you an example. What's an easy thing? Let's say I can encrypt to a message and you can decrypt only if you know a signature on that message, as an example.


So, the statement that I'm encrypting to is I know a signature on a particular message and the witness for decryption would be the signature. What I just said, by the way, is called identity-based encryption.


[Anna Rose] (1:07:59 - 1:08:00)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:08:00 - 1:08:16)
But witness encryption generalises that quite dramatically. Let me give you another example. Suppose I can encrypt to a map, a map, some complicated map, and you can decrypt if you have a colouring of the map such that no two adjacent countries have the same colour.


[Anna Rose] (1:08:16 - 1:08:21)
Whoa, okay, some characteristic of the underlying thing that you're encrypting.


[Dan Boneh] (1:08:21 - 1:09:11)
Cool. Exactly, there's some public statement and there's some difficult to derive witness for that public statement. I can encrypt to the public statement without even knowing what the witness is and you can later decrypt if you know the witness.


This is called witness encryption. Yeah, it's a very cool concept. Oddly, I'm glad you say that because actually that had turned out to be quite useful in a lot of different areas, in particular in the Bitcoin world now there's a bunch of applications for witness encryption.


Of course, on Ethereum there's a bunch of applications for witness encryption. So now you ask, well, what's the connection to zero knowledge? Okay, well, it turns out zero knowledge is a general tool for simplifying the problem of witness encryption.


Rather than proving to you that I know the witness for a statement, I can prove to you that I know a proof that I know a witness for a statement.


[Anna Rose] (1:09:11 - 1:09:12)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:09:12 - 1:09:25)
Yes, so snarks to the rescue. Yes, so really to get what's called universal witness encryption, all I need to do is build a witness encryption scheme for a snark verifier.


[Anna Rose] (1:09:26 - 1:09:35)
What would be a universal witness encryption? What does that mean? Like going back to our example, you're kind of still talking about two people interact or two individuals.


Right, right, right.


[Dan Boneh] (1:09:35 - 1:10:03)
So suppose I want to be able to build witness encryptions for arbitrary statements. Okay. Or I should say arbitrary polynomial time statements.


Yeah, so, you know, whether it's maps or signatures or, you know, take your favourite thing that you want to encrypt to. I want to be able to, you know, I want to encrypt maybe to an Ethereum block. Yeah, so you can decrypt only once you know what the block is, for example.


Yeah, so I want to encrypt to arbitrary statements. Turns out, if we had a scheme that does that, we would call that a universal witness encryption scheme.


[Anna Rose] (1:10:03 - 1:10:03)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:10:03 - 1:10:05)
Because it allows you to encrypt to an arbitrary statement.


[Anna Rose] (1:10:05 - 1:10:06)
Is this for general?


[Dan Boneh] (1:10:06 - 1:10:23)
For general, yeah, universal means general. Yeah, exactly. Got it.


Thank you, yes, maybe that's a better word. Yeah, so we can do that in principle using a snark. So rather than proving that I know a witness for the general statement, I'll just prove that I know a witness for, sorry, that I know a proof.


[Anna Rose] (1:10:23 - 1:10:30)
You have a proof of a witness, but are both ZK? Are you kind of like proving a proof? Like, is it ZKZK hops, or is it?


[Dan Boneh] (1:10:30 - 1:10:41)
No, it's just once. It's basically I'm just proving that I know a witness for the statement. And then the thing that I encrypt to is a snark verifier, right, so I just need to encrypt.


[Anna Rose] (1:10:41 - 1:10:46)
Okay, yeah, yeah, no, it makes sense. Okay, so yeah, okay. I'm sorry, I'm just trying to map my mind.


[Dan Boneh] (1:10:46 - 1:11:13)
Yeah, maybe it takes a little bit of thinking, but this is a general statement that snarks can kind of help us in building witness encryption. So now the question is, basically, can we build a witness encryption for the statement that a snark verifier accepted a certain proof? And there's actually been some interesting progress on it.


Today, I would consider this as, you know, it's one of these problems that in principle we have a solution, in practise we don't have a solution.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:13 - 1:11:15)
It's like proving that the verifier verified.


[Dan Boneh] (1:11:15 - 1:11:20)
Well, not just proving that the verifier verified, decrypting only if the verifier verified.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:20 - 1:11:21)
Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:11:21 - 1:11:22)
Yeah, so decryption.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:22 - 1:11:24)
Interesting, making it like the trigger. Okay.


[Dan Boneh] (1:11:24 - 1:11:28)
Exactly, trigger for decryption. So decryption would only work if the verifier verified.


[Anna Rose] (1:11:28 - 1:11:29)
Interesting.


[Dan Boneh] (1:11:29 - 1:12:05)
Yeah, it's a beautiful question. You know, maybe even to make it like super concrete for people, let's just use GROSS-16. Can you come up with an encryption scheme that I can encrypt to a particular statement so that you can decrypt only if you have a GROSS-16 proof for that statement?


And if you think about the GROSS-16 verifier, it's just like a couple of pairings. So you need to be able to decrypt only if those pairings happen to be, you know, some expression and formulas happens to be, in pairings happens to be satisfied. Cool.


Well, it turns out we don't know how to do that. Yeah, great open problem. Please, please work on it.


Please solve it. If you solve it, Anna, I'll be your friend forever.


[Anna Rose] (1:12:06 - 1:12:07)
Yeah, it's gonna be me.


[Dan Boneh] (1:12:07 - 1:12:08)
Yeah, there you go.


[Anna Rose] (1:12:08 - 1:12:09)
Or maybe someone on my show, I don't know.


[Dan Boneh] (1:12:10 - 1:13:15)
Yeah, absolutely, yeah, yeah, yeah. Yeah, so actually there's a little bit of progress on building witness encryption for Snark's verifiers. There's this company called Allocint.


Misha and others in the company have a kind of a recent paper that I would say, you know, moves it, moves the needle a little bit, but still not quite practical in that, if I remember correctly, their encryption, the size of their ciphertext is a couple of hundreds of terabytes for every encryption. So, you know, so there's progress, and hopefully, you know, hopefully your podcast will encourage more people to work on this problem. Now I should say actually that for specific statements, there's actually a lot of progress on better witness encryption.


Like I mentioned, for example, if you want witness encryption for verifying a signature, for that, that is just identity-based encryption, and for that we have very, very efficient constructions. Yeah, so there's a class of statements for which we have efficient constructions. It's just for a general Snark verifier, we currently don't have a good witness encryption scheme.


So this might be a fun thing to work on.


[Anna Rose] (1:13:16 - 1:13:48)
Dan, I'm actually just curious, in terms of your research, like are you still focused on ZK? I know you through the ZK lens, like I know you from the work that has inspired ZK systems, that has, you know, the actual work on ZK systems, all of these ZK applications, but I'm curious, like, you know, you sort of mentioned obfuscation, you mentioned some of these, like, projects that branch off of ZK maybe, or could be parallel, they're kind of in the same category. Yeah, what is your focus today?


Like, are you doing FHE stuff? Are you doing anything else that maybe we've never heard of?


[Dan Boneh] (1:13:49 - 1:14:09)
Oh yeah, yeah, absolutely, yeah. Look, I love the blockchain space because it generates new, interesting cryptography questions to work on. So much of my research is basically cryptography for blockchains.


And so any sort of problem that comes up in the blockchain space that has even a sliver of cryptography, I love it, I'm on it.


[Anna Rose] (1:14:09 - 1:14:09)
Nice.


[Dan Boneh] (1:14:10 - 1:14:20)
Yeah, so, well, so it's funny you should say that because, for example, encryption starting to play an important role in the blockchain space. Like classic encryption. Yeah, yeah, yeah, because people are interested.


[Anna Rose] (1:14:20 - 1:14:22)
Not fully homomorphic, not like the...


[Dan Boneh] (1:14:22 - 1:14:35)
Yeah, yeah, yeah, even just regular encryption. Why? Because there's now quite a lot of interest in encrypted mempools.


For example, Aptos is deploying, actually, encrypted mempools, and I think other chains are moving in that direction as well.


[Anna Rose] (1:14:36 - 1:14:45)
I remember hearing about this so long ago, but it was just an idea. Like, and it didn't get sort of traction, I remember, but now I guess it has.


[Dan Boneh] (1:14:46 - 1:14:56)
Yeah, so encrypted mempools basically means that when I submit a transaction to the mempool, I submit it in encrypted form, and it only gets decrypted after it's finalised on-chain.


[Anna Rose] (1:14:56 - 1:15:03)
And so this would basically get rid of all of the sandwich attacks, and basically the MEV scenario would kind of be removed.


[Dan Boneh] (1:15:03 - 1:15:39)
Exactly, so front-running, it becomes harder. By the way, not impossible. Encrypted mempools are not the solution to everything, but they're a step in the right direction.


Yeah, so they make all these sandwich and front-running attacks harder, but it's important to remember, not impossible. The amazing, look, the reason I love the blockchain space so much is you say encrypted mempools, okay, but now how do we implement encrypted mempools? It turns out it relies on threshold encryption, yeah, because it's the validators of the block that are going to threshold decrypt the transactions once they're finalised in a block.


Okay, so you say, fine, we know we've been studying threshold decryption for 40 years, let's just do that.


[Anna Rose] (1:15:39 - 1:15:40)
But no.


[Dan Boneh] (1:15:40 - 1:16:49)
Yeah, I mean, this is why the blockchain is so cool. Well, amazingly, it raises brand new questions in threshold decryption that nobody has thought to ask in the last 40 years. Oh, that's good.


So maybe I'll just say the three questions. I'll say them very briefly. Sure, sure.


The first one is what's called batch decryption, which is how is it, you know, we have a thousand transactions in the block out of maybe 10,000 transactions in the mempool. Do we really wanna go transaction by transaction and decrypt them one by one, or can we somehow batch them all together and decrypt only those thousand transactions out of all the transactions in the mempool? This is called batch decryption.


The goal is to release a succinct secret key that would let us decrypt the thousand transactions that have been finalised, but not any of the other ones in the mempool. So this is called batch decryption. I should say, this is originally studied in a paper by Vamsi and Sanjam Garg and others, and this is actually also what Aptos is deploying.


It's really cool to see this happening, I should say, with, so for example, I got really excited by this question, and with Nusrat Tass and Evan Loffer, we have a post-quantum version of batch decryption. Yeah, so of course, for every question you ask now, you can also ask, well, what's the post-quantum version of this?


[Anna Rose] (1:16:49 - 1:16:50)
Post-quantum, yes.


[Dan Boneh] (1:16:50 - 1:16:59)
Yeah, yeah, and we have a new question to research. Cool. So for a researcher, a cryptographer researcher like me, the blockchain is like, you know, I'm like a kid in a toy store where there's like wonderful open problems everywhere.


[Anna Rose] (1:16:59 - 1:17:11)
And you get to almost revisit, I mean, this is like revisiting areas that have been studied and developed in the past, sort of assumed to have settled, and then all of a sudden you're finding a new angle to kind of revisit.


[Dan Boneh] (1:17:11 - 1:17:47)
Exactly, all of a sudden there are new questions. So batch decryption was one new question in threshold decryption. We have this whole work on what's called the decryption context, which maybe I won't describe now since we're running low on time, which is a way to strengthen threshold decryption for encrypted mempools.


And finally, there's this question of what happens if the validators give away their secret keys, right? You hope that they keep their secret keys secret and only decrypt after the transaction is finalised, but a searcher could go to the validator and say, hey, I'll give you a hundred dollars if you give me your secret key. The validator would say, great, here's the secret key.


There's no penalty for the searcher.


[Anna Rose] (1:17:47 - 1:17:54)
There's no penalty for the validator. For the validator, mm-hmm. So they could act, yeah, they could act badly.


It's basically breaking the game theory a little.


[Dan Boneh] (1:17:54 - 1:18:18)
I would call that they act rationally. In economics, this would be called acting rationally. Okay.


Yeah, put a spin on it. So anyhow, so this question, so now there's already this, all of a sudden, this question of what's called traceable threshold decryption, which is if a way, if you give away your secret key, I should be able to find out that it's your secret key that was given away, so then I can slash you. Yeah, again, turned out nobody studied this question.


[Anna Rose] (1:18:19 - 1:18:32)
It's funny, so the threshold decryption encryption story, for me, it starts with Dave Oja talking about it at Osmosis. Never, I don't think they ever implemented it, but I remember him sharing that idea.


[Dan Boneh] (1:18:33 - 1:18:39)
Osmosis actually did a lot for encrypted manpools, and they actually, they did surface these questions.


[Anna Rose] (1:18:39 - 1:18:40)
Yeah.


[Dan Boneh] (1:18:40 - 1:18:50)
They didn't have answers to all of them, but yeah, they actually, because they implemented things, they came across these questions, and so yeah, actually, I give Osmosis a lot of credit for introducing the idea.


[Anna Rose] (1:18:50 - 1:19:55)
We just had Dave on the show a few episodes ago, and he's back in the fold on the ZK front, which we're very happy about. Excellent. Nice.


Okay, so Dan, we've covered a lot of ground. I'm gonna have to go back and listen to the show and then find little threads and hopefully programme some episodes that I can go deeper with maybe some of the people you mentioned or explore some of this work. There was one point that you mentioned at the start of the show, the Proximity Prize.


We don't have too much time, but I think it's worth sharing. Just a note, because we did this series on Lean Ethereum, we did an episode with Giacomo, who I know is also judging the Proximity Prize with you, but I think it would be cool to hear an update. I mean, just a note, from where I'm sitting, as I'm putting together the ZK mesh, I've seen the impact of the Proximity Prize just in the kinds of works that were released, especially last fall.


Like we just saw paper after paper after paper kind of like addressing the problem that the Proximity Prize wanted folks to address. But yeah, has it been solved? Has it been proven?


Has it been disproven? Like, are we done?


[Dan Boneh] (1:19:55 - 1:19:56)
No, not even close.


[Anna Rose] (1:19:56 - 1:19:57)
Prize awarded or?


[Dan Boneh] (1:19:57 - 1:21:21)
No, not even close. So yeah, great. Let's do this, let's do this briefly.


Sure. So yes, so the Ethereum Foundation and particularly Justin Drake deserves a lot of credit for this. They put together this thing called the Proximity Prize, which is a million dollar prize for solving a purely algebraic question.


It's elementary algebra about polynomials. It's literally something that Gauss could have already worked on if he had asked the question. Yeah, it doesn't require any kind of 20th century math.


What's interesting is that, why do we even care about this? Why is the Ethereum Foundation paying a million dollars to solve this problem? Well, it turns out if we solve it, we get better snarks, particularly base fold and weir become better, provably better rather than conjectured better.


Even the S2 prover becomes better. So there's basically snarks generally becomes better if we solve it. So there's a lot of incentives to do it.


So let me actually just say the problem. I might be using words that not everybody's familiar with, but hopefully it will encourage you to go look up these words. So the problem is basically about Reed-Solomon codes.


And the question is, in a Reed-Solomon code, what is the largest distance such that the mutual correlated agreement error is still small? Yeah, that's the whole problem. So maybe you need to look up Reed-Solomon codes.


Maybe you need to look up what is mutual correlated agreement. But that is basically what the question is. So resolve that and you get one of these prizes.


[Anna Rose] (1:21:22 - 1:21:25)
It's a couple of prizes, right? It's not a single prize?


[Dan Boneh] (1:21:25 - 1:21:59)
Yeah, yeah. I mean, so the judges are myself, Giacomo Fenzi and Gala Arnon. And yes, even partial progress would be super interesting and we'd love to see both negative and positive progress.


I should say we actually put out, just recently we put out a survey paper explaining exactly what the grand challenges in the Proximity Prize are. So if you look on ePrint, you can look at open problems in proximity questions by myself, Giacomo and Gala, and you can see exactly what the problems are and what's known and what are possible directions for attacking these problems.


[Anna Rose] (1:21:59 - 1:22:11)
Like in the last few months though, we have seen a lot of papers, at least show up on ePrint about this topic. Are those attempts? Are those, like when we see that kind of thing, is that like that team's submission?


[Dan Boneh] (1:22:11 - 1:22:27)
Yeah, yeah. So those are, well, those happened actually before the prize was finalised, but those were kind of steps towards, I'd say maybe small steps towards resolving the prize, but very, very, very interesting steps. Really beautiful, beautiful ideas, really cool stuff.


[Anna Rose] (1:22:28 - 1:22:39)
And great researchers focussing on it, which is fun to see, like that kind of, that group effort. Folks we've known have had on the show over the years, like sort of focussing in on the proximity question.


[Dan Boneh] (1:22:39 - 1:23:37)
So the Ethereum Foundation, by allocating this million dollar prize, is really focussing the researcher's community on this problem, and that's bearing fruit. So like you said, there has been a flurry of results on this question, making some initial steps towards making progress. One result that I wanted to mention is by Goyal and Guruswami that actually resolved the conjecture just for non-Reid-Solomon codes.


So we're interested in this question for Reid-Solomon codes. They showed everything is solved if we go to other codes. And so now the question is, well, first of all, can their techniques apply to Reid-Solomon?


But more interestingly, can we build snarks out of these other codes? Cool. Yeah, so there's actually a cool area to explore there.


The current thoughts that's in our survey paper says that they're not such good snarks, but who knows, maybe they can be improved and they can be made into better snarks, and that's another way to resolve this challenge.


[Anna Rose] (1:23:37 - 1:24:10)
Very nice, cool. Dan, I wanna say thank you so much for coming on the show. As always, tonnes of ideas, so much to dive into.


I hope we get to cover some of these topics in the future. I hope you'll also send some folks my way if you think they'd make a good guest to talk about these topics in more detail. I can't wait to see the work that's coming out of your group this year.


I feel like I, through ZK Mesh, I also get to see some of those works come out. Yeah, thanks so much for the survey. Thanks for being my 400th episode guest.


[Dan Boneh] (1:24:10 - 1:24:16)
Yeah, thank you, Anna. It's always fun to be on this podcast, and please stick with it. Don't turn it into an AI podcast.


[Anna Rose] (1:24:18 - 1:24:27)
Okay, got it. All right, I wanna say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya, and Hector, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.
