Anna Rose [00:05] Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero-knowledge research and the decentralized web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, Guillermo and I explore the aims of the Cryptopunk Movement with co-creators Alex and Nicola. Alex is a long-standing builder in the crypto industry, most recently as a co-founder of Flashbots, and is now the program director of ARIA, the UK's DARPA equivalent, where he's currently focused on funding new cryptography based on natural laws.


Nicola has been leading the cryptography R&D effort at Protocol Labs for the last 8 years, and also founded the syndicate Deep Crypto.


In this episode, we discuss the Quantum Punks Manifesto, returning to the topic of quantum cryptography and looking at how this compares to other eras in more familiar cryptographic areas. It was very exciting to dig back into the quantum cryptography side of things. We get a chance to cover lots of applications for this stuff. So, yeah, hope you enjoy.


We do reference an event that Nicola and Alex held in Paris back in March. We're going to try to dig up the links to these videos. We mention them a couple times throughout the episode. So look for these in the show notes.


Now, before we kick off, I just want to let you know that zkSummit13 is happening on May 12th in Toronto. The event is coming up fast, and if you haven't yet bought your ticket, we do encourage you to do so. Also, we do have some student tickets still available. So if you would like to apply for a student discount, you can do so over on our website zksummit.com. Hope to see you there.


Now Tanya will share a little bit about this week's sponsor.


Tanya [01:56] You might already know the ZK Jobs Board, a place where teams can share open roles with our community. But when it comes to key hires, finding the right fit in our niche space can be difficult. That's where Missing Link comes in.


They're a talent team built for the Web3 era, helping projects across the ecosystem connect with the right candidates at the right time. They've worked with names you'll recognize, Ethereum Foundation, Matter Labs, Lido, Mina, Web3 Foundation, and many more, filling critical roles that drive these teams forward.


Whether you're an established project looking to fill a senior leadership role, or a startup searching for specialized talent to refine your product-market fit, Missing Link can help. They've done it for some of the biggest teams in the space, helping them, and now you, find the right people fast.


For more details, check out the show notes, and visit their website at missing-link.io. So thanks again, Missing Link.


And now, here's our episode.


Anna Rose [02:57] Today, Guillermo and I are here with Nicola and Alex, the co-authors of the Quantum Punks Manifesto. The quantum punk community explores the intersection between quantum and cryptography. And this is hopefully what we're going to get a chance to jump into today. So welcome to the show, Alex and Nicola.


Alex Obadia [03:14] Thank you for having us. Happy to be here.


Nicola Greco [03:16] Thank you everyone. Happy to be here.


Anna Rose [03:18] Hi, Guillermo.


Guillermo Angeris [03:19] What's up?


Anna Rose [03:20] Excited for another quantum episode?


Guillermo Angeris [03:23] Yeah. I know. It's great. I get dragged onto the physics stuff, which is harking back to old memories.


Anna Rose [03:30] Yeah. So just a few weeks ago, Guillermo and I did an episode with Jelena Vučković, where we did an intro to quantum engineering. I'll add the link to this in the show notes in case the listener would like to get some background.


Today, I feel like the focus will be primarily on the overlap between what we covered in that episode and the cryptography space. We're going to be talking a little bit more about that intersection.


When I think about quantum and cryptography, I feel like it might be good to just kind of define a few different ways that we hear those terms combined. One is quantum will break cryptography. So some classic cryptography, they don't think will stand up to quantum computers.


There's also post-quantum cryptography, which is current cryptography, classic, which people think will be able to stand up to quantum computers won't be broken. But then there's this third category, which is quantum cryptography. And I feel like when it comes to the quantum punks, this is the area you guys are most focused on. Am I right?


Nicola Greco [04:31] Absolutely.


Anna Rose [04:31] Cool. Okay. So, but before we do jump into this quantum cryptography, cryptography built for a quantum environment, I feel like it would be great to talk about your backgrounds, and what led you to work on this.


I feel like I know both of you originally from the ZK space, actually, or I've seen you at events you were both involved. 


Nicola, let's start with you. You were actually on the show long ago. We did an episode, I recorded it at Zcon0. It was like an event episode where I interviewed about 13 people, and you were one of those interviews. At the time, you were focused entirely on ZK. So, what's been your history since that point? What got you into quantum?


Nicola Greco [05:11] So what happened is back then it was, I would say, the first few years of zero-knowledge proofs.


Anna Rose [05:18] Yes.


Nicola Greco [05:19] And I was working at Protocol Labs, and I worked at Protocol Labs for over 8 years. And I led the cryptography and protocol design R&D team. There, we worked on making zero-knowledge proofs more and more practical.


And in a way, back in those days, like a few years before, I was a PhD student at MIT and some of my professors told me, well, ZK is still academic material.


Anna Rose [05:47] Not going to work.


Nicola Greco [05:48] And it's insane what happened 10 years later. And in a way, when looking for what is today, at that stage, we looked into quantum cryptography. And to some extent, when we talk to professors about quantum cryptography, these professors tell us, well, this is academic material.


And in a way, I relive that experience. And in a way, we -- I don't know, Alex and I built thick skin on people not believing in super early technologies. And so, I'm very excited actually when I hear that in quantum cryptography.


Anna Rose [06:24] And did that get you started? That kind of got you excited and you decided, okay, this is what I want to work on now?


Nicola Greco [06:30] This is more like an exploratory area for me. I love this -- working on this moment of technology where it's unclear if it can be practical, but the more you dive deep in to, maybe there is some low-hanging fruits.


Anna Rose [06:46] Nice.


Nicola Greco [06:46] And I'm actually very excited to find either myself or to help other people find. That's why we wrote the manifesto to find more and more intersections between quantum and the cryptocurrency industry and quantum, so that we could have new applications and maybe better hardware driven by these new applications.


Anna Rose [07:06] Nice. Alex, what about you? What's your background, and what led you to work on this?


Alex Obadia [07:11] Yeah. So I've been more around the cryptography sector. So, before the quantum punk stuff, I was building Flashbots for a few years.


There's some privacy element to what we were doing. We came at it from this very practical perspective of, okay, we need to add privacy to what we're doing. And we went more in the trusted hardware direction, but we still explored all these other primitives. 


And before that, I was running these ZK meetups in London, and having fun doing that in like 2017, 2018. And so, I've been around and super interested in cryptography, always thinking that cryptography is one of those things in the blockchain industry that it feels very tangible to me.


And so, whenever I have a crisis of faith, cryptography is one of the kind of stable point that I kind of go back to, and I'm like, this has applications way beyond the industry that I'm in. And it's also just so fascinating. And it relies on something that I can understand, which is, okay, it's based on new maths or new methods that are kind of understandable.


And so, Nico and I were meeting regularly to catch up and hang out, share ideas. And he kind of told me, dude, quantum is booming. It's super exciting. And I'm hearing about this quantum cryptography stuff, but it feels a little bit far. Maybe, is it too far? And should I focus on IO, or should I focus on this instead? What are the problems that I should really focus my next big adventure on?


And when he told me about quantum, I was like, dude, this is sick. This sounds like the most exciting thing. And also, even if you think it might be a little bit further away now, you're not factoring in our own power to potentially accelerate it, the same way what we've seen with the zero-knowledge space.


And so, we kind of committed to, okay, let's explore it. And from there, we kind of started going to events, looking really stupid and asking very basic questions.


Anna Rose [09:05] Like quantum events, or?


Alex Obadia [09:06] Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Exactly. We went to one particular quantum event where it was full of quantum companies, and we just showed up. We're like two little like, hey, we're from the crypto industry. And so, people were confused what we were doing here.


Guillermo Angeris [09:19] Nice.


Alex Obadia [09:20] And we were just asking basic questions. And I think from that event specifically, we came out of it both realizing, okay, there's a gap here. They don't know that there's a whole ecosystem that is so hungry for new cryptographic primitives, and that if you give them those tools, they get so excited about the types of applications they can build.


On the other side, the crypto people don't seem to be aware that this exists. And when you mention quantum, it's usually about post-quantum secure systems. And so, we just felt, okay, there's an intersection here. Not only a gap in communication, but also a gap in culture, where the event we went to felt a little bit like corporate and trad.


And we were like, where are the hackers? Where are the misfits? Where are the people that are kind of overselling their projects, which is super common in crypto. And you kind of need it. To some extent, you need the dreamers, you need the people that are really thinking about the big picture.


Anna Rose [10:09] I was just thinking, like the brainstormers or the idea people.


Alex Obadia [10:13] Exactly.


Anna Rose [10:13] It sounds like the ones with the weirder ideas. Yeah.


Alex Obadia [10:15] Exactly. Missing the idea guys, missing the philosopher kings, whatever you want to call them.


Anna Rose [10:21] Thought leaders.


Alex Obadia [10:22] And so, from there, we were back in the taxi at the end of the day, and we were like, dude, we have to do something. We have to at least point out that this intersection exists.


And from there we worked on, okay, let's write a manifesto. That's like the most culturally appropriate way for us to do this so that we really bring the values we think are important to bring in there. And so, that's kind of how we went about.


Anna Rose [10:45] Cool.


Guillermo Angeris [10:46] The manifesto is actually -- it's actually quite lovely. I mean, it's a short document, clearly outlined stuff. I came in, for what it's worth, very skeptical because as usual -- like, sorry, Alex. I actually know you quite well, so I was less skeptical because of that, but nevertheless, I was still --


Alex Obadia [11:01] I appreciate that.


Guillermo Angeris [11:0]: Somewhat skeptical and was like, oh yeah, the number of times I've heard quantum in like the years before I studied it, and then when I studied it, and then afterwards, has been hilarious. But then I read the thing and I was like, no, actually this is quite reasonable.


I mean, obviously still forward looking for sure, but it's an easy thing to rally around. It's clean, it's clear. I was very impressed in the writing. Honestly, I say that about very few "manifestos", but this was actually quite good. So very excited to dig into the philosophy, ideas, notions, constructions behind all of this stuff.


Alex Obadia [11:38] Thank you for all the compliments. I'm glad you say that.


Nicola Greco [11:40] I'm glad you say that because we actually spent an insane amount of time on this manifesto.


Guillermo Angeris [11:44] I can tell. Yeah.


Nicola Greco [11:45] We wrote it in 10 different versions. And then I remember one day I said, Alex, I'm sorry, I think maybe we need to write it from scratch. And that happened several times. And I think Alex has been a meticulous author and editor of a lot of things.


Guillermo Angeris [12:02] Yeah. I know. I mean, I feel that deeply because a lot of my papers often go through complete from scratch, 4 or 5 rewrites. And I can tell that that happened here because the ideas are very clean, they're nicely organized. They say exactly the thing. Two sentences describe it. No more, no less. And I'll stop with the effusive praise, but nevertheless, this is very cool.


Anna Rose [12:24] Maybe we should actually jump into what's in this manifesto. Do you guys want to share with us sort of the overarching ideas, what you're trying to cover?


Nicola Greco [12:33] Let me just give you some context. Like Alex said, there is a big gap between the two communities, and we wanted to find some applications that would make both communities excited.


And in some ways, quantum cryptography, it's not something new. People have been studying theoretical applications of quantum cryptography. And not only for 10-year-plus, there are companies that build quantum key distribution systems, but a lot of these systems have applications mostly in defense.


And in a way, it's like for secure communications between armies or banks, I don't know. But it's very cybersecurity oriented. And if you think about the early stage of the Internet, the Internet was some sort of defense communication technology.


Anna Rose [13:19] Totally.


Nicola Greco [13:19] And so, we kind of wanted to try our best to wake up people and say, hey, if the Internet stayed at defense, we would not have social media, E-commerce, TikTok, and similar things.


Anna Rose [13:31] Yeah. I don't know if we want any of those things.


Guillermo Angeris [13:33] True.


Anna Rose [13:33] But yeah.


Nicola Greco [13:35] I mean, the idea here is that --


Anna Rose [13:35] You mean like the world we know today would be different.


Nicola Greco [13:38] Let's say that. Let's say that. And what happened in cryptography? In a way, even cryptography started as defense, and then we started thinking about what can we do for the final users. And so, what tool can we build so that the individual can feel more powerful? And so, this was what started the cypherpunk movement back in the 80s.


And so, Alex and I spent some time thinking, what if we could bring some cypherpunk to the quantum industry? And the more we looked into this, the more we realized that quantum cryptography is some sort of cypherpunk endgame, where there are things that you can do with quantum cryptography that you cannot do with classical cryptography. 


And so, not only we could use quantum cryptography to better secure existing systems from quantum computers, but we have a way to build new cryptography. And we're going to touch on that into the rest of the podcast. And new cryptography primitives have generated an incredible amount of value.


In a way, encryption gave us private messaging. Signatures gave us HTTPs, and the ability to do e-commerce online, or communicate online. And consensus gave us blockchains. We yet to see what zero-knowledge proofs are going to give to the mainstream users.


But I wonder what can quantum cryptography give us that we cannot think about because you cannot just do it with classical cryptography.


So that's how it started. And there are two main pieces in this manifesto, which is, Quantum Accelerationism, and the other one is New Applications of quantum cryptography for cypherpunk applications.


Anna Rose [15:26] Cool.


Alex Obadia [15:27] The cypherpunk applications, it's kind of repeating a little bit of what we said before, which is saying, hey, if we have new cryptographic primitives, by New, I mean, they enable new capabilities. There are new applications we can build with it.


And the kind of product-market fit for these new tools is probably cypherpunk applications. Just because in the cypherpunk ideals, we care about the most secure systems, and we care about some of these guarantees a lot. Trustlessness or trust minimization is critical. For some other applications, it isn't.


And so, on one side, it's to tell people from the privacy and cryptography industries, you guys should look over here. This is probably the end game for what you want to do. These are the systems that will be the most secure. These are the systems that you might even --


Anna Rose [16:15] They're secured by physics.


Alex Obadia [16:17] Exactly. Secured by physics instead of computational assumptions. You might not even need to rely on hardware anymore, thanks to some of the new primitives you have. And you have these kind of new world of primitives that emerge.


And so, the first one is new applications can be created with this. And the second kind of tenet of the manifesto is those new applications are going to garner funding and demand from users, but also funding from investors like Guillermo on this call. And that creates a virtual cycle that we've seen.


And for us, we're very familiar with it, which is the space accelerates, researchers start working in industry, whole teams start being poached from academia to startups to accelerate specific primitives on a specific metric that is incremental, and so less interesting to academia, but very interesting to industry.


And from there, what you get is an acceleration of quantum hardware more generally. And so, the quantum accelerationism is, by having more demand for these primitives, you have more demand for the underlying infrastructure that enables them, which creates this broader movement within quantum technologies, not only quantum cryptography.


And that has this kind of knock-on effects that can bring about the general kind of benefits of quantum technologies that go beyond just quantum cryptography.


And so, it is kind of saying a new growth vector that can come into the quantum technology space, that is not the quantum computing paradigm or narrative, nor is it the quantum sensing narrative, but the cypherpunk applications of quantum networks.


And so, the first point in your applications is us talking to cryptography people. The second point is us talking to the quantum people. So telling the crypto people there's cool applications here for you to build, telling the quantum people there's demand that you're not looking at that is coming. That's the kind of duality of those two statements.


Anna Rose [18:12] When you were meeting with the quantum folks and you were going to those events, you sort of mentioned, it's a little bit corporate. I've only been to your event, which was meant as a kind of mix of the cryptography people and the quantum people. 


But what sort of struck me with the quantum side of things was, I got the sense that they're a little bit more like web2 classical startups too. Even if they're small, they're still -- like they're hardware. I mean, and I don't blame them. It's sort of they're dealing kind of with these hard primitive, expensive timelines. They're going to have to think very long term in order to raise money. And it's just a very different business.


Do you imagine sort of new startups coming out in the middle in that intersection, having a different spirit? Aren't they still going to be constrained by the same issues of timelines and expense the minute they start playing in quantum?


Alex Obadia [19:06] I mean, first there's already these startups that have started emerging. Some people that helped co-write the manifesto, and kind of reviewed it, were people that are now started companies in that space, raised money from crypto investors. And some other are rising in that space. So it's already happening.


And what we found, and what got us excited is that when we posted the manifesto, it resonated with quantum people. And they said, I cannot believe that this was written because this is the energy we need in the space. A lot of these quantum communication people were hackers in their past, or came into quantum communication because it was, oh, the most secure systems.


So a lot of them have that mentality, and the only reason they're not really embracing it is because where's the demand? We can build these kind of systems, but we don't know that there are new applications beyond the current ones.


And the current ones are this kind of defense-related applications or kind of very primitive applications, that is, quantum key distribution. Or you have to kind of enter the fold of quantum computing and you have to serve their needs, because this is where a lot of the narrative is both funding wise and also just hype wise.


And so, in a way, we're kind of saying let us create a new narrative, and some of these people are ready to jump ship and to kind of slightly steer the direction of their company towards what they really believe in. And this has been recurring.


It is not universal at all, but there is definitely a set of people that believe that. That being said, you're right that there is this hardware component to quantum cryptography.


Anna Rose [20:34] That's what I was going to say. Also, you just mentioned quantum communication.


Alex Obadia [20:38] Yes.


Anna Rose [20:38] And then there's quantum engineer -- like there's quantum computing. There's sort of these different components that we learned on the last episode. Are there some parts of the quantum space that are more flexible and faster? Are they all sort of stuck in the hardware side of things?


Alex Obadia [20:53] No. So quantum communication is like, let's say, the superset. And then quantum cryptography is just secure communication in a way.


Anna Rose [20:59] Okay.


Alex Obadia [21:00] But you're using the rails, the quantum communication rails. Quantum computing is more -- you could consider it like local communication in a way, where you don't need to necessarily share quantum state to another quantum processing unit.


And then you have quantum sensing as the third broad category. Quantum sensors, my understanding is some of them are quite mature and used in some applications already.


Quantum computings are the ones that have garnered the most hype, but haven't really delivered on useful applications yet. And so, they're in that state, somewhat blockchain-y state of selling a lot of promises, and people are excited about them.


And the quantum communication side, you have some primitive applications. And what quantum communication requires, from what we've seen, is very little kind of hardware for it to work for some applications.


And so, part of the manifesto is kind of saying, hey, instead of focusing on quantum computing and on kind of basing your timeline, a little bit the way Guillermo discussed at the beginning, like being a skeptic, because computing is far away, quantum communication, you can use today.


You can use an optical fiber to share a photon that you've encoded information in between two parties, and you have these networks that already exist, spread kind of all around the world. They aren't huge, and there's still a lot of work to do, but this is kind of a technology that we can start using at a primitive level.


That being said, there's still this hardware component. And so, relative to starting a cryptography company, let's say, where you can really --


Anna Rose [22:28] It's still hard.


Alex Obadia [22:29] Yeah, yeah. I mean, you have to either build your hardware or you have to use someone else's hardware. And it is not deeply expensive, to be honest with you. You can build a very basic quantum network on your table, like a few nodes or something like this. I don't know, Nico, if you have a price range, but like maybe 500k or 600k.


Anna Rose [22:51] Oh, not much.


Guillermo Angeris [22:51] I'm sure price is even that expensive just using a photonic setup. But --


Alex Obadia [22:56] The most expensive part is the photon detector, and then it depends on the application you're trying to do with it. The more features you want your network to have, the more expensive it can get. If you want the leanest, definitely cheaper than 600k.


Guillermo Angeris [23:09] Yeah. You can make a nice tabletop for under 10k, I think. But just so it would be a demonstration of a cool thing. Not like a useful necessarily.


Alex Obadia [23:16] Or also depending on if you buy off the shelf, or if you buy parts that you then build yourself, that's a big component. You have hardware providers that you can buy off the shelf from. But there's a huge markup on that obviously. If you're savvy enough to build it yourself, then you can get the cost down to maybe 50k or 60k.


But all of this to say, there's a hardware component, you have to wrestle with it, and that makes it kind of cross disciplinary to some extent, a little bit more than cryptography because you need that kind of somewhat hardware expertise, or at least an intuition and understanding of what's going on in that space. And then also the understanding of protocols and cryptography.


Nicola Greco [23:55] I just want to add one thing, which is, if you're scrappy enough like a small startup, I think there is a big secondary market of these devices that are not used by the startups that are pivoting away from this.


But I just want to say one thing, which is, one of the intuition that Alex and I had was that in quantum computing, we have to wait for better hardware. And the question is, do we need to wait in quantum cryptography for better hardware, or can we use existing technology?


And it turns out that there are applications for which you can just use existing technology. There is no new open question. It's just, like Alex said, put pieces together or have professional systems or professional network operators that put these systems in a cloud-like facility.


If you want to rent some nodes in a network to run some protocol on a quantum network, you cannot really do this today, which is crazy. Like if you -- we are coming from a Web2-Web3 experience where you can just deploy a smart contract, or you can just open an AWS account and you have the cloud going. For quantum communication, you cannot just do that.


I think we are very close to get to that point, but we don't have easy to access quantum networks. If you want to deploy an application, most times you get told either to engage in a contract with some of these network operators, or to talk to a university to give you some nodes.


Imagine saying this to a builder in the Web3 community. And so, this is the role, in a way, of the quantum punks movement to say, hey guys, there is a whole community that can grow out of fiddling with things, or hacking on things on open source software.


And there are players in the space that are thinking the same way as us, and this is very exciting. And so, hopefully,  we do our little to change that mindset.


Guillermo Angeris [25:56] I want to dig into two things. One of them would be more specifics around what this thing is, like what this would enable.


But number two, I want to point out something kind of funny, which is, the anthropology here. I mean, the culture of physics and physicists from PhD labs who know this stuff is in some sense completely different than the anthropology of the 10-year-old programmer who grew up to want to do cryptography things.


I don't mean that in a deterministic sense. I don't mean it's always the case. It is just kind of funny, right? You go work at a physics lab, you have all this very fancy equipment, it's like millions upon millions of dollars. There's a certain scrappiness that comes from that.


But there's also a certain thing about like, oh, we have to do things the way that they were intended to be done by the previous generation of physicists who entered this lab. And it's kind of interesting. I mean, not everyone is like this, of course, and there's weird pirates out there who just go and build shit for fun.


But anyways, it's kind of interesting because it's kind of a slight cultural distinction of the two.


I think the other thing that I want to point out, which when you say it, it sounds so kind of trite, but it's very neat, is we now have the technology, even if it's not 100% perfect, but we can build real things, is like, again, a weird ethos thing. 


A lot of people who come into this field, it's like a very particular field. Cryptography was a thing that you wouldn't teach undergrads up until pretty recently, because it was really written in papers. It wasn't really written in a standard way. You got to go do a PhD on this thing.


Physics is kind of still that way. Like doing real deep quantum stuff kind of requires you chew through a bunch of papers and stuff.


Anna Rose [27:46] Like you have to be further along in your academic career to get there.


Guillermo Angeris [27:50] Yeah. It hasn't been systematized enough to make it legible for people who don't want to stick out this long journey. So it almost self selects for this interesting person who is kind of willing to chew glass for a long time before they're able to kind of get to the top.


But as it gets systematized, because technology gets better, people get better at explaining these things, we have better abstractions for the thing, now, this intermediate layer of kind of crazy pirates who just like --


Anna Rose [28:20] Builders.


Guillermo Angeris [28:20] Come into the field. Yeah. Exactly. Want to just build things, are like, I see where this is going and we can start building. It just becomes -- in other words, a field becomes legible to this higher level people who are just willing to start startups around this stuff. Just comes in.


And I think, I mean, obviously, this doesn't happen in a vacuum. You guys are part of this. In writing this manifesto, you're making the field legible to people who are not simply 7th year PhD students working on a transducer or something.


Nicola Greco [28:50] I kind of agree. Not only I think that the quantum cryptography, just to give you context, it is a very small niche field.


Guillermo Angeris [28:59] Yes.


Nicola Greco [29:00] At QCrypt, there is -- which is the main quantum cryptography conference, I think there are 300 attendees. If you do maybe a rough estimation of 1 to 5 professor to student ratio, maybe this ratio is wrong, I don't know. But what I'm telling you is that you cannot have more than 300 experts in quantum cryptography.


And some of these people are not even computer scientists. They are physics people. They are trying to learn -- in QCrypt, no. But there is a broader community of experimentalists. They are trying to build these systems in practice. 


And so, not only is it very hard to work on these things, but the combination of these two fields is an insanely small niche. And so, the drive that you need to have in order to be working in this intersection, it's very strong. But in a way it reminds me what happened in the early days of cryptocurrencies.


You had people that -- you needed to be an expert in a way in cryptography. Like in order to understand cryptocurrencies, you needed to understand consensus, and what it meant. Or in order to work on zero-knowledge proofs, you needed to have a body of knowledge. There was no short summary of what these things were or an easy explanation.


Alex Obadia [30:12] There’s no ZK Podcast.


Nicola Greco [30:13] Yeah. There was no ZK Podcast.


Guillermo Angeris [30:14] Exactly.


Anna Rose [30:14] Well, actually, when ZK Podcast started, I think it was still like that. But yeah.


Alex Obadia [30:17] I mean, I think, Anna, but you contributed to making it more legible.


Guillermo Angeris [30:22] This is exactly it. Yeah. Anna, you are making this legible, you know.


Alex Obadia [30:25] A hundred percent.


Nicola Greco [30:24] In the early days of cryptography, you needed to have a strong understanding of cryptography, a strong understanding of economics, and then a lot of imagination. And so, this is the point in which we are right now. The field is not empty. There's a lot of theoretical quantum cryptography, which is very exciting. And there is the beginning of applied quantum cryptography, we have QKD, we have it for more than a decade now.


Anna Rose [30:53] What's it called? Web -- what did you say?


Alex Obadia [30:55] Oh, QKD.


Nicola Greco [30:56] QKD, Quantum Key Distribution is the, let's say, the only practical and piece of technology of quantum cryptography that is solved today to final users. It's about -- we can talk about it in a second. But the thing is, there is just that, and we need more creativity and more intersection between these two fields.


Guillermo Angeris [31:17] I want to dig in a little bit more into kind of the previous thing we were talking about, which is, okay, let's say we have the AWS of quantum communication over short ranges or something, whatever. I mean, feel free to place whatever constraints you want on it. And you could launch. There's some nice abstraction for what this means and all this stuff, which are questions that are outstanding, but what can we do with that?


You could launch a service that does this thing for you. What are some things that might be enabled that might be interesting that people haven't done yet? Or maybe that people are doing, but on a lab setup as opposed to doing it out in the wild with some cool code that executes a thing out there?


Nicola Greco [31:59] Let me start maybe with the North Star, and then we can go back into what you can do. And this is also helpful to give an intuition of what we're talking about. And most importantly, it's a way for me to spread a meme which I think is very strong, and it's quantum money.


And most people in physics or in cryptography, unless you work on quantum cryptography, you're not aware of what it is. And I find it quite surreal.


So, in the 60s, there is Wiesner, the first quantum cryptography researchers, that writes a paper that sits on a for 15 years, rejection after rejection, 15 year plus, actually. And then at some point in the 80s, this paper gets published and it's called Conjugate Coding. And in this paper, he talks about two main examples of ideas that you could do with this. And one is quantum money. 


And we're talking about 25 years before Satoshi Nakamoto wrote the Bitcoin paper. So, this quantum money, kind of -- this idea of quantum money, which I will describe in a second, predates even the cypherpunk movement. So, it's incredible that a person had this paper on some shelf that talked about peer-to-peer money and at the same time started a field of quantum cryptography.


So let's talk about quantum money. Before we talk about quantum money, let's talk about physical money, in a way, Gold coins. I have a gold coin. It's in my pocket. I give it to you, Guillermo. In that moment, you know it's in your pocket. The transaction is instantaneous, it's private. There is no third party that needs to be notified. What a great piece of technology.


    


So that's why we went from physical money to digital money. Digital money is like a file, that you encode money in a file that I send to you, but at the same time, I could send to Anna. And that's a problem. So we need to make sure that there is someone else, a third party, let's call it a bank, that orders these transactions.


Alex Obadia [34:20] Or Ledger.


Nicola Greco [34:21] And so all in a sudden -- or -- yeah. Exactly. Exactly. Or you can take the bank and distribute the governance on many people with proof-of-work, and that's a blockchain. So even blockchains don't remove the bank, they just replace the governance of the bank.


And this is the problem of digital money, because I can send the same file to two people, double spending, essentially.


And so, the question is, can we build money that can be transferred in a digital-like form that have physical-like properties? Meaning that once I send it to you, they leave my pocket, they enter your pocket, the transaction is settled and no one needs to witness it.


Anna Rose [35:03] And it could never be cloned or copied.


Alex Obadia [35:06] Correct.


Nicola Greco [35:06] Yes. Absolutely. So, and quantum money uses properties of physics, like the no-cloning theorem in particular, which essentially says quantum information cannot be cloned once you receive it.


And so, you cannot try to look into the information, say, stored in the quantum state -- like preserved in the quantum state, because the moment you try to look into, you disturb the system, and then you lose information.


And so, if I could encode money in a photon, and I could send it to you, it's like from my pocket to your pocket, then I cannot send this money to -- like send these photons to someone else. The issue is, where are you going to store these photons? We don't have USB sticks for photons yet.


Anna Rose [35:52] Wow.


Nicola Greco [35:53] And so, that's why I said before, this directionally is the North Star. It's one of the applications that we can look into as North Star. And it, for sure, is an application that a lot of Web3 people can resonate on. In a way, is a very cypherpunk application.


Anna Rose [36:10] Totally. This, by the way, in our episode with Jelena, we did cover teleportation and the no-cloning theorem. And I'm guessing that's what you're discussing here. Is that teleportation in a way, because it disappears on one side and appears on another.


Alex Obadia [36:26] No. It would just be no-cloning. The teleportation part happens in repeaters. So, because this no-cloning thing, most people would tell you that it's annoying, because they will tell you that, in normal networks, you repeat a signal over so that you're able to amplify the information that you're sending, because you can copy it. And so, that allows you to send information far, far away.


In this case, if you're trying to amplify this photon, you would have to copy it, and you're not able to do this. So you have to build a different type of amplifier, and different type of repeater. This repeater is based on, it's entanglement swapping based, and so, you use this teleportation property.


Kind of like transitive maps, if that makes sense. Like A to B, B to C. So you can do A to C, where like the B parts, you do this teleportation thing, which is, teleportation is just a cool name for it.


Guillermo Angeris [37:17] It is a pretty sick name, actually.


Alex Obadia [37:19] It's an awesome name.


Guillermo Angeris [37:21] It's a good advertising department name, you know.


Anna Rose [37:23] A hundred percent.


Guillermo Angeris [37:23] Like quantum teleportation.


Nicola Greco [37:25] The way to think about it is that there are two different layers of the stack. One is teleportation is useful for the networking stack. In a way, if I have the photons that I want to send to you, I can send them to you directly, or I can use alternative technologies to send this quantum state to you, like quantum teleportation.


Anna Rose [37:44] I see. Yeah. It's the in-between. So, does it really have to do with how far away you are, like the distance?


Alex Obadia [37:49] Yes. Exactly.


Anna Rose [37:50] Okay.


Alex Obadia [37:51] Again, let us preface some of this with the fact that, you should see us as crypto people that are entering the quantum space for the last year, and that are like learning. So, we are maybe further ahead than some of the listeners, but we are still learning.


So my understanding is that the photon gets absorbed in the optical fiber at about 100 kilometer. It gets absorbed before even, but 100 kilometers is kind of the distance of -- after that you need some form of repeater.


You have trusted repeaters that actually decode the information, read it, and then reissue a new photon. But then at that point, it's trusted, so you kind of lose a lot of the cool properties. Or you have these trustless repeaters that are based on entanglement swapping.


Anna Rose [38:38] Teleportation.


Alex Obadia [38:39] Yeah. And then it's teleportation.


Anna Rose [38:42] Got it.


Alex Obadia [38:42] And so, the trusted repeaters is what a lot of QKD networks today are using. And the trustless repeaters, some of them are built, but they're quite primitive, and there's a few things that they need to improve. One of those things is what Nico mentioned before, like storing the photon for a little bit longer.


So slightly better quantum memories helps this repeating process to happen. Or if it fails, you can do it multiple times because you're still storing the photon, basically.


Guillermo Angeris [39:08] I have two maybe slightly lower-level questions, and it's okay, feel free to not answer them, if you're like, ah, this is too stupid.


The first question I have around it is, surely we can use the no-cloning theorem. We have something in some state, and I just like give that to you. And be a no-cloning, we can certify that I cannot clone that. I can't just have that in my pocket and give it to you.


The problem is like, we need to still verify the thing you've given me is money, as opposed to just being some arbitrary, made up new state. And to do that, we have to measure it. So how do you ensure, like when you measure this piece of blob that hopefully is money, but you do not know if it's money, you destroy part of it. This is the same reason why no-cloning is a thing.


So how do you ensure that the blob I've given you, which could be -- hopefully, is a coin in my pocket, but actually could be some made up nonsense that vaguely looks like a coin in my pocket. How do you ensure that's a real token?


Nicola Greco [40:21] As a computer scientist, the formal answer that I would give you is that there are protocols that define this property as local verifiability, which means that there are some quantum money protocols that you can locally verify. Meaning that -- I don't know the physics part of it. I don't even know if we have constructions for it. But technically, people have been thinking about this problem.


I'm slightly more expert in, say, private quantum money. So quantum money, we cannot have them today, mostly because we don't have memory. So --


Guillermo Angeris [40:56] Sure. Yeah.


Nicola Greco [40:56] So thinking too much about quantum money, it's a bit of a problem. It's something that I really want, but I cannot have for, until we have innovation in quantum memory.


And so, but what we could have, in the short term, is a private quantum money. And private quantum money, it's not something that Web3 people will be insanely excited about, but the idea is that as long as you have, I call it a minter, but you can think of it as a bank, or a node that is a trusted node that mint token.


What you can do is you can ask the minter to mint tokens on request. And you can engage with the minter in a protocol to verify that what you have received are quantum tokens. But this requires interaction with the bank.


So I'm not aware of any protocol that gives local verifiability in private quantum money. But there is a way to do that. What I'm saying is, worst case -- as a super applied pragmatic person, I'll tell you, well, worst case, just talk to the bank, and the bank will engage in the protocol with you in an interactive protocol, and they will verify the tokens.


Alex Obadia [42:05] Maybe Nico it's worth instead of looking at quantum money, explaining how quantum key distribution works. Because, I think the question of Guillermo is the more basic, hey, this information that I've encoded in the photon, sure, it's tamper resistant. If anyone intercepts it, they can't read it. But the ultimate receiver of that information, how can they then read that information?


Nicola Greco [42:29] Yeah, of course. So again, like Alex said, let me put a big disclaimer here, which is I'm a computer scientist, and I don't come from quantum cryptography, but I'm here to learn and be corrected. I also gave a presentation in the past where a professor told me, well, this triangle they drew is incorrect. And I was very happy about that.


So if you're listening and I say something wrong, please reach out. I want to become a better quantum cryptographer. 


So the idea is the following. QKD is the problem of quantum key distribution. So before cryptography, you and I want to encrypt a message so that other people around us, like an eavesdropper called Eve, cannot listen to our message. 


So before, let's say modern cryptography, the way we did it in an information theoretically secure way, was that we come up with a long pad of numbers, 01010101, that we use to shift the bits of our message. But when we come up with this one-time pad, we need to meet in person to exchange it. There is no way to exchange this one-time pad in a secure way.


So this like, let's say, Claude Shannon cryptography. And then Diffie-Hellman showed up, and they said, well, there is a way to do key exchange, but you need to add assumptions. You need to assume that some problems are hard for computers. But the issue is that these protocols are not -- they're not resistant to quantum attacks.


Anna Rose [44:02] Because the quantum computers can --


Nicola Greco [44:06] Quantum computers can break the discrete log.


Anna Rose [44:08] Break this hardness.


Alex Obadia [44:09] Yes. Exactly.


Anna Rose [44:10] Like it's hard to find the solution. It's hard to -- you need endless amounts, hours of computation in order to solve this problem. And now all of a sudden, a computer comes along where it can do it faster.


Nicola Greco [44:20] Yes. So the crypto -- I'd like to introduce a new meme that I like a lot, crypto mathematics and crypto physics. Because the word quantum means so many things. If I say quantum cryptography, a lot of people will misunderstand it with post-quantum or quantum cryptography. So let me just simplify it for everyone.


There is mathematics. There is crypto. There is cryptography that is based on mathematics, or what I mean by this is a simplification. It's based on assumption of some hardness of mathematical problems. And that's the cryptography that we used. And some of it is post-quantum, some of it is not. And the one that is post-quantum, we don't really know.


Anna Rose [45:01] We think it's post-quantum.


Nicola Greco [45:03] Yes. Exactly, exactly, exactly.


Anna Rose [45:04] It's post quantum until it's broken.


Guillermo Angeris [45:06] Yep.


Nicola Greco [45:06] Yeah. And it could be that we didn't even have to wait for quantum computers to break some of this post-quantum security. We've seen it with isogenies in the past few years, and we saw with some assumptions in lattices and so on.


But anyway, so going back, there is crypto mathematics, which has mathematics as assumption. And then there is crypto physics, that has physics as assumption. And so, we have this one time path, but we have to meet in person. Okay. Then we have this modern cryptography, Diffie-Hellman, but it's broken with the quantum computers.


So the question is, can we build a way to exchange a secret, a secret key, so that we can later encrypt our messages that does not rely on mathematical assumptions, and instead relies on the laws of physics? This is the hype-y way to say this.


And the way it works is like this. So there are two parties. Each of them sample quantum state. And I'm going to explain for those that want to look it up later on, the BB84 protocol. And it's a milestone paper that is a subsequent paper on the Conjugate Coding paper from Wiesner.


And so, in BB84, you encode information, say, in quantum state, which could be in the form of photons. And both Alice and Bob sample these BB84 states, and then they send them to each other. And then, after they receive each other's state, they measure it.


But the beautiful thing about these BB84 states is that they can be measured in two bases. So Alice encodes them in a specific basis, and Bob measures it in a basis that is random. So sometimes it's the same. If it's the same, they're able to extract the information that Alice send them. But if they don't use the same basis, they will get random information as the property of quantum.


And so, they engage in this protocol, and then, they talk with each other in a public classical channel, and they say which indices of these BB84 states they read in the same basis. And then there is like some other protocols to figure out if Eve was in the middle.


And so, this is an example where you can use the property of quantum states. And in practice, it is the Heisenberg Uncertainty principle, where you don't know in which basis the information has been encoded and you can only know if you happen to measure it with the same basis that has been encoded. Otherwise you get random information.


Guillermo Angeris [47:45] Yeah. I guess, very quickly on that point, the idea behind the random basis is these will function as your parity check bits to make sure that there is no eavesdropper, if I'm getting that correctly.


Nicola Greco [47:58] So the technicality of the protocol is the following, is that some of the string we measured in the correct way, and we keep those bits, the ones that we didn't measure correctly, we put them on the side.


And then, we're trying to do some sampling to see if there was some eavesdropper, because if there was some eavesdropper, they would have taken the message in between. But because you cannot clone that message, you cannot copy because the moment you try to measure it -- if Eve tries to measure the quantum state, then they would not know the bases themselves.


And so, when they send a new quantum state, which is a fake quantum state, with enough sampling can be spot. It's like there are in total 4 chances, and the probability is like 3 over 4 on the power of n.


Guillermo Angeris [48:47] Yeah. Again, for the people out there, that's like -- think of it as like, you can send some stuff, which depending on how you measure it, will be either information that you get, which you're encoding via some error correcting code, so you can always decode it. Or B, you're going to get some checksum bits. And the checksum bits will -- like the statistics of the checksum bits will indicate whether there was an eavesdropper on the channel.


Because by construction, by no-cloning specifically, we have this weird property that if Eve measures the thing on the channel, she will change the statistics of what the outputs are. So what Bob will see will be a different -- statistically, quite distinct.


So this is the same thing as we do in ZK proofs. In ZK Proofs, we have this thing where we have a bunch of a huge message, and we sample little bits of the message, and we check that they're consistent with some underlying set of operations that we expect.


And we do this via error correcting codes partially, and then we do this via these weird proximity tests or whatever. We're doing exactly the same thing here, except -- we're doing a similar statistical test here, except one is over one basis, and then one is over the basis which actually gets you information.


And one of them will tell you whether there was an eavesdropper, while the other one will tell you what the actual message should have been. So that's roughly mapping it down.


Anna Rose [49:59] I think for any listener who heard our episode with Jelena, we did actually talk about a similar case in that one.


Guillermo Angeris [50:05] Exactly.


Anna Rose [50:06] You've talked now about a couple of these applications. But I feel like in your exploration of this intersection, are there other things that you've discovered are possible, even theoretically, at this point?


Nicola Greco [50:18] Yeah. For sure. I'm going to say some, and I'm sure Alex has a bigger list. There are some things that you can do beyond quantum key distribution, these private quantum money solutions that you could try to experiment with.


And then more broadly, in theory, we know that we have new kind of -- if you also add compute, you could enter a new realm of applications.


So, for example, there are digital copy protection programs or, well, copy protection programs. Essentially, I can give you a program that you can run, but you cannot make copies of. And so, you can give it to someone else, but you cannot make copies of. And in a more, say, extreme way, there is this idea of one-time programs.


Unfortunately, you cannot have one-time programs without hardware assumptions. One-time programs are not possible neither in classical nor in quantum, but with some trusted hardware, you can have these one-time programs. And there are some groups that are working on these one-time programs.


And the beauty of it is that you could encode, say financial -- for example, you could encode an option in a program that I send to you, and then you can decide whether or not to exercise the option without talking to a ledger or without talking to anyone. And this program only runs once.


So this is a cool idea. Definitely, could have a lot of impact. And then, you have other applications. One that I find very interesting is quantum position verification.


Anna Rose [51:51] Is this like a GPS?


Nicola Greco [51:52] Yes, yes, yes.


Guillermo Angeris [51:54] It's like a physically-based GPS.


Anna Rose [51:56] But what are you trying to -- you're trying to say that something is somewhere. How would you do that?


Nicola Greco [52:01] So in practice, you play on latency because you cannot make information travel faster than light. That's the principle. The question is --


Anna Rose [52:10] Oh, it's latency. It's how long it takes to get somewhere. Okay. 


Nicola Greco [52:14] Yes. Yes, yes. The issue with it is building this in a secure way, it's very hard. And then there is a -- I don't know, other problems that come to mind is a quantum random number generation. And in a more broad sense, there is this concept of device-independent cryptography that you could apply to all the things that I just mentioned before.


You could have device-independent QKD, device-independent quantum random number generators. Device-independence means, today, if you run a protocol, you need to trust the machines that you have that is correctly running the protocol. In a way, when we buy a ledger, or like a hardware wallet, we don't know if it's running correctly.


Anna Rose [52:56] Yeah.  


Nicola Greco [52:56] The nice thing about device-independent cryptography is that you can test the ledger to see if it is correctly executing the protocol, which is pretty exciting. Because all in a sudden, you don't have to trust the hardware.


Anna Rose [53:08] I don't really get that though, device-independent. What makes it independent of the device? Maybe I just don't fully understand what the connection that exists now is.


Alex Obadia [53:19] So I'm not entirely sure, to be honest. This is one of the more extreme things. Actually, at the event that you came to, there was the inventor of device-independent cryptography that gave a talk, Roger [?] Colbeck.[a]


My understanding is that you're able to basically query the device, and you're querying it in a specific way. You're trying to see if there's a Bell inequality violation, that tells you -- you're trying to -- without the technicality, which I'm not super familiar with, you're trying to test whether this device is really a quantum device.


And if it's not, then you know that it's been either tampered with or that it's faulty. If it is, given the output you give it, it's going to give you -- given the input you give it, it's going to give you a certain output that's going to tell you, oh, okay, this is legit.


And so, for that reason, it's device-independent in a way, because it doesn't mean you don't use any devices. It means you use a device, but it means you can ask the device before, like, hey, are you messing with me or not? And you know that whatever answer it gives you is a truthful answer.


Anna Rose [54:18] Okay. I think when you said device-independent, I thought it was more like some program can exist on multiple types of device that are very different from one another, but that's not what you meant.


Alex Obadia [54:29] No. It is slightly confusing. Yeah. Yeah. What it means is really like you're removing -- it's trustless hardware in a way. So the way this person, Roger, explains it as well, he also says now you can have quantum hardware made in factories that you do not trust, and you're still able to check whether the hardware was tampered with or not.


Anna Rose [54:48] Interesting.


Alex Obadia [54:48] Or you can have someone else run the hardware somewhere else, and you're able to check potentially remotely, if you have a quantum connection to that hardware, that the hardware is running correctly with some, probably, things that I'm missing here.


Anna Rose [55:01] Are you using the -- is this the same as we described before, where if someone has eavesdropped, it's different. Is that what this is playing on?


Guillermo Angeris [55:09] Yes. This is using the same idea. So the way to think about it is imagine hardware that does two things. Number one is it spits out a ZK proof that the output is correct. And number two, it also spits out a roughly-speaking quantum proof that it has not copied any of the bits anywhere else into the machine.


Anna Rose [55:27] Okay.


Guillermo Angeris [55:27] Because if you were to do that, you would be fucking with the statistics of the underlying thing. This is not quite a perfect analogy, but that's the best way to think about it. It's like, what is the problem of a machine right now? The machine itself could be doing all sorts nonsense, and sending out data to other things.


There's no way for us to know that in a digital world. Because, again, you can copy data, you can send it out, you can keep it in a bunch of stuff, you can do additional processing on it, and you would never know unless you knew how the machine worked.


But we can prove that the output of the machine is correct. The output that it hands you, Anna, is good by just giving you a ZK proof or a succinct proof, or whatever. But now, again, we now don't know this property of we can't copy out things from the machine.


And so, the big brain version of this is like, okay, sick, but here's a cool thing that guarantees that people haven't done copying of this underlying state.


Anna Rose [56:15] Because if there had been any observer, you would get a different outcome. You couldn't get that proof.


Guillermo Angeris [56:21] Exactly. So in some sense, it -- again, it's not exactly succinct proof, there's a fancier quantum thing that you can do with this. But fundamentally the point is the same. It's like, you know the computation is correct, and you know that nothing else has been done, because if anything else would have been done, it needed to observe the data that is passing through these pipelines --


Anna Rose [56:37] That's cool.


Guillermo Angeris [56:38] For it to go out and give you the right result.


Anna Rose [56:40] Nice.


Guillermo Angeris [56:41] So there you go. That's maybe the analogous, weird conglomeration of the two things. I don't know if that scans Alex or Nicola.


Alex Obadia [56:49] No. Yeah, I mean, I think that was great. What's exciting about it is, if you think of the current movement in the blockchain industry of trusted hardware, you could think that the end game of trusted hardware is you don't have to trust the hardware at all. That's a meme-y way of saying it, but I think that's it. So I think some of the people working --


Anna Rose [57:10] Trusted -- trusted execution environment.


Guillermo Angeris [57:13] Trustless trusted execution environment?


Alex Obadia [57:15] Yeah.


Anna Rose [57:15] No. I just put "Trusted" -- I just --


Guillermo Angeris [57:16] Trusted trustless execution environment?


Anna Rose [57:17] Added another "Trusted."


Guillermo Angeris [57:18] One of those.


Anna Rose [57:18] Like we add another ZK. But yeah.


Alex Obadia [57:20] You know, I think that could be very, very exciting. Obviously, there's a lot of limitations to this. There's extra overhead involved in a device-independent protocol. Again, that's my understanding. But my understanding is you could make them better, you could improve those protocols if there was demand for doing that. 


And so, again, from the point of view of the crypto industry, and the point of view of some of the problems that the trusted hardware people are facing right now, which is, well, these chips are fabricated by large corporations. We don't have access to them. They might --


Anna Rose [57:51] Something could be in there.


Alex Obadia [57:52] Insert like backdoors in it. Exactly, exactly. And this is kind of saying, well, let them build the hardware, and we're just able to test it independently. You have similar things happening where you're able to test hardware with Infrared scanners.


I don't know if you've heard of this. This is not quantum anymore, but this is still crypto physics to some extent, where you're able to scan the chip to understand if anything has been tampered with. I don't know the details, but there are people working at that intersection as well.


Sorry, this is a side note to what Nico was saying, but there are scaffoldings towards quantum hardware that starts from more traditional hardware that just improves its trust guarantees over time, and that is quantum inspired. And there are people working on this.


Sylvain, for example, if you've met him before, is one. He wrote this paper called A Path towards Crypto Physically Secure Trusted Hardware. And we've a lot of --


Anna Rose [58:50] From which project?


Alex Obadia [58:51] He was at IC3 and now he's building his own company around this kind of building this trusted hardware and improving the guarantees based on different physics assumptions you can make on it.


So that's one exciting thing, device-independent. I think Nico mentioned a lot of other primitives that are cool.


Anna Rose [59:08] Yeah.


Alex Obadia [59:08] Some of them are based on unclonability, some of them are based on entanglement as the two key primitives. And then, you can build cool stuff with each of those kind of things. One that I will shout out for Guillermo and that I don't know a lot about --


Guillermo Angeris [59:24] Oh, God.


Alex Obadia [59:24] Is you can use entanglement for coordination, and to play --


Guillermo Angeris [59:30] You have to play the correlated equilibria versus playing the standard Nash. Yeah.


Alex Obadia [59:34] And so, there is this paper called Quantum Bidding in Bridge, where people say that if two players, they're playing together in a Bridge game -- so this is not blockchain bridging. This is the game of Bridge.


Anna Rose [59:44] Bridge card game. Okay.


Guillermo Angeris [59:46] Yeah. That one.


Alex Obadia [59:46] Yeah, exactly, exactly, exactly.


Anna Rose [59:48] Grandparents' game.


Alex Obadia [59:50] If they have -- if they share an entangled photon, they're able to win more frequently because they're able to coordinate better. So there's this kind of overlap with kind of game theory or some of advantages in games and entanglement that's quite interesting.


Some people have started to think about it in the context of financial markets for some specific use cases, which is mostly theoretical, but that's an interesting intersection that I don't think people have been thinking a lot about practically. But that is also exciting in the context of using entanglement as a primitive.


And to go back to a previous application that Nico mentioned, the same way you have copy protection, you can also have certified deletion. So this is all playing with the same concept of unclonability, but in different ways. And for each of these sub kind of use cases, if you have a little bit of imagination, you could potentially think of things you can do with that


If you can prove that you've -- you can certify that you've deleted something in a verifiable way, even if those two parties do not trust each other, it augments our communication kind of systems with new ways to communicate with one another. And so, again, from a crypto mind's perspective, it's kind of being kids in a candy store.


Guillermo Angeris [01:01:02] Yep.


Anna Rose [01:01:02] So many things to play with.


Nicola Greco [01:01:05] In a way, we started with the North Star, which is not the only North Star, but it's an exciting application, which is quantum money. Then we discussed some applications that are more broad than quantum money. But only some of them, unfortunately, are practical today.


So what I'm trying to say is, I want to excite the listeners, but I also want to give caution, which is, the only thing that we know is practical today, meaning you don't have to come up with new hardware, it's QKD. But there are a few others that could be implemented today.


And one in particular that I care a lot about, and I'm trying to talk to everyone so that everyone knows that this is possible, is this paper from Or Sattath and others, which, by the way, Or also has been in the show.


Anna Rose [01:01:50] Yeah, yeah. That was a great episode.


Nicola Greco [01:01:52] Is the Tokens for MAC. And MAC is this primitive in cryptography, which is Message Authentication Codes. The idea is, I give you a code that then when you give back to me, I can verify that I gave you the code. And this is used in many places.


But the issue with MAC, is that I can only generate these authentication codes myself because I have the secret key to do it. Imagine for a second that I want someone else to generate an authentication code on my behalf. The naive solution would be give them the secret key. You understand that this is not good, because then they can generate as many authentication code as they want.


And the beauty of this paper is that it introduces this idea of tokens that can be spent -- quantum tokens or quantum state that can be spent. And by spent, I mean measured in a specific way so that you can generate one MAC only on my behalf.


So it would work more or less like this. I create some quantum states, some photons. I send them to you. If you had memory, you would keep them until you need them, but without memory, you would spend them straight away. And by spend them, it means you would measure the quantum state that I sent you to generate an authentication code. And you can only generate one authentication code only.


Alex Obadia [01:03:19] One application of this that we have in crypto is actually from my former project Flashbots. One offshoot little toy project that they did is called teleport.best. And using trusted hardware, but not quantum stuff. But again, with trusted hardware you have some phantom quantum properties.


They were able to create this platform where, let's say this marketplace where I have a Twitter account, and I'm able to sell access to my Twitter account into a single tweet that other people can buy this token, and they can spend it to write a single tweet from my Twitter account, and I don't have to reveal any information about my Twitter account to them, and they don't have to reveal who they are as well, because they're using the properties of the trusted hardware, and you're using some form of uncloanability in that sense.


So again, this goes back to the point I was making before where one path that you could see towards the crypto space becoming more quantum pilled is through trusted hardware to some extent, because trusted hardware offers you some quantum-inspired properties.


And so, you could think of building applications that are kind like teleport.best, which is more of a toy application than anything else. But you're already building, the user expectation around unclonability, and then you're able to just improve the guarantees behind it. That's one thing I'm excited about. Anyway, that's one toy application, right?


But it's cool that it opens up this market. Now you can use it, and you don't have to fear -- well, assuming you trust the trusted hardware, you don't have to fear that someone is going to get your Twitter account, and you're able to sell fan-access tokens to your Twitter for like one tweet, and you're able to do cool stuff with it.


So you can imagine maybe that for more useful applications. But that's one way to apply this practically. That kind of made sense, and that went slightly viral and people started using it, at least for a short amount of time.


Nicola Greco [01:05:11] The beautiful aspect of these tokens for MAC is that you're creating this new concept of a physical resource that gives you access to something. It is almost like a capability. In distributed systems, the concept of capability, it's very fascinating, which is, if you want to write into a file, you need to be -- generally, there's a list of people that can write into the file.


In capabilities-based systems, someone gives you the capability, and you can give this capability to another process, but the process can write into the file as long as they have the capability. So this idea of capabilities, I think then it's very synergetic with this idea of tokens for MAC.


You could move around this token to whoever they need it, but they can only spend them themselves once. With this idea, I gave a presentation at the Quantum Punks Event we organized in Paris on, directionally, how you could be building quantum-based Layer 2s. In a way, you can think of it as an instance of private quantum money.


And the idea is we could be building a bridge from Layer 1 into a quantum network where in this quantum network, I could move these tokens around. And whenever I'm done transacting, I can settle them back into the Layer 1. It's a bit complex. So I would probably send the listener to go watch that video.


And unfortunately, there's not clear protocol yet, but I would love for new brains to go and trying to find what are the intersections between what's possible today in cryptocurrencies. Because our whole thesis is that if we find an application like this, we could accelerate the space like we did for zero-knowledge proofs.


Anna Rose [01:07:02] Wow. Are there any other open problems or areas that you're brainstorming about or that you've noticed people are working on?


Alex Obadia [01:07:11] So there's a few. Number one, to keep it short as well, is whether we can allow people to remotely and classically connect to quantum networks. And so, this would bypass the hardware constraint entirely. One of the criticism that you guys might have for quantum cryptography is that, well, I need quantum hardware. This is going to be --


Anna Rose [01:07:33] Super expensive. Hard to get.


Alex Obadia [01:07:35] Expensive, and it's just friction. It's like a hurdle that I have to overcome, and so, I need to be motivated to do this. And that's friction that kind of drags people experimenting with it, et cetera.


And so, one thing we've been looking at is could you at home classically connect -- by classically, I mean, with your computer, in classical communication, connect to a quantum network in a way that is trust minimized, or in a way that you would be able to fully verify what other operation is done in the quantum network, was done based on how you wanted it to be done, in a way that's privacy preserving as well.


So, there are protocols that are called, for example, remote state preparation, that they're very inefficient protocols, but that kind of start going in this direction of thinking about, okay, how can someone remotely prepare a state for me. And then remote state measurement would be the other side of this.


And so, you can do this in a trusted way today. It's just an API where you're able -- you just need to talk to the quantum network, and it needs to prepare the photon the way you want it. If you trust whoever is preparing the photon, that's easier.


And so, that's one thing that we're excited about. Because if you manage to do this well, it can start trusted and then it can progressively improve its guarantees. We get into a new paradigm for quantum kind of networking and cryptography where now Guillermo, and you, Anna, can hack on quantum networks via your classical computer.


And so, that I think is one hurdle that we see as potentially accelerating things, and that's very achievable. At least, the trusted version of this delegation, verifiable -- sorry, trusted delegation achievable in like three months. It's just a matter of this software that's needed. That's my understanding.


If you want to do verifiable, then you need actually cryptography work to improve the protocol. And that's a little bit more complicated. But I imagine that this would be something that a lot of cryptographers and quantum people would work on if there was kind of this demand for, okay, now if we had this particular thing that's verifiable, and if we can improve the overhead massively by some math tricks, or some application-specific verifiability, I think they would start thinking about this more if there was this kind of use case.


So that's one thing I think we're excited about as a problem because it is short term, it accelerates the pace of the space. It's a very concrete kind of developer experience problem in a way. And it also pulls on our, at least more Nico than my expertise. But verifiability, and these things are problems that Nico had to look at in the context of Filecoin, in proof-of-storage and these things. Like how can someone prove that they have storage somewhere else? 


Anna Rose [01:10:18] I was wondering if -- you had mentioned sort of there not being quantum memory. Is there anyone working on quantum memory?


Alex Obadia [01:10:25] Yeah. So there are people working on quantum memories. And, actually, at the event in Paris, there's one presentation on it. Maybe we can link it in the description of the podcast.


Anna Rose [01:10:33] Yeah. Are the videos out for that?


Alex Obadia [01:10:34] I just uploaded them. I need to add the titles.


Anna Rose [01:10:36] Perfect. Okay.


Alex Obadia [01:10:38] They're not like public public. I need to put the titles on them. But they're all --


Anna Rose [01:10:40] Maybe by the time the episode airs. they will be though.


Alex Obadia [01:10:42] A hundred percent. Yeah.


Anna Rose [01:10:43] Perfect. Okay. We'll add them in the show notes then.


Alex Obadia [01:10:46] Great.


Anna Rose [01:10:46]: Nice.


Alex Obadia [01:10:46] So people are building quantum memories, and they're building different flavors of quantum memories, is my understanding. So there's different ways that you can trap this information. Some way is purely photonic, where you kind of trap the photon, and you're trying to keep it.


And some ways is you convert the photon to another object, and then this object is more stable, and then you're able to keep it there. And then the challenge becomes now you have to reconvert the object back to a photon later. And so, this conversion part are called transducers. Guillermo briefly mentioned transducers early on.


Guillermo Angeris [01:11:17] Yeah. We also chatted about it in the previous episode as well.


Nicola Greco [01:11:20] Nice.


Guillermo Angeris [01:11:20] Because JelenA has been working on for a while.


Alex Obadia [01:11:23] So, I mean, it's super exciting. This is technology that is needed for quantum computers. And so, people are working on quantum memories to help synchronize multiple quantum processing units that are connected together.


So if you think distributed quantum computing, you need to synchronize those units together. And to synchronize them, you need for a short amount of time to kind of hold their state together. And so, this is where the memory comes in.


And so, the unfortunate thing is that a lot of quantum memory companies that we talk to, which by a lot, I mean like five of them, but it's big in that space, that were distributed all over the world, what they told us is they started as a quantum networking companies, improving the capabilities of quantum networks.


And what they found out is, well, there isn't a ton of demand for better quantum memories. However, in computing land, quantum computing land, there is demand for it, and we have these clients which are quantum computing companies that are willing to pay for it.


 And so, some of them have slightly steered away from the pure networking applications towards the -- it's still a networking application, but it's to connect quantum processing units in data centers next to each other. So people are working on this, and some of the results that they have are super encouraging as well. But so that's another problem that's hard and difficult to deal with.


Guillermo Angeris [01:12:44] It's funny. I mean, it feels a lot like memory, just like in classical sense. Our memories used to be literally magnets with wires that cross over, and you could only hold them for a long enough time. Then afterwards there were these acoustic bits actually, where you would encode bits as a traveling sound wave that would reflect a few times, and you'd have to measure it on the out. I don't know if you guys know about this.


Alex Obadia [01:13:09] I did not know that. That's amazing.


Guillermo Angeris [01:13:10] So it's funny. It's like the same thing, but we used to have this for bits in the digital world too. We couldn't just hold -- holding bits is a weird thing. You could kind of read them and write them down in a way that you can't with quantum state. But it's very similar, like doing anything more than a few things, turns out to have been really hard up until, shockingly, recently.


Alex Obadia [01:13:31] No. I think part of this journey, what has been interesting is kind of looking back at our stack, the normal Internet stack, and realizing how complex it is, and how much improvement it has undergone over time, and how much it's super technically complex as well.


And so, that has been fascinating and very interesting and also encouraging to think that, well, this took time, kind of what you just mentioned, Guillermo.


To close on quantum memories, why it's exciting, why it's a high leverage kind of technology to develop is because you need them for repeaters. So if you have better quantum memories, basically the longer the quantum memory is, up to some number of time and the number of photons, et cetera -- let's make it simple. The longer the quantum memory is, the bigger the network can be, basically.


What's interesting is there's like one microsecond, one millisecond, one second, maybe one minute, and then at the one-minute mark, you get to covering the whole world. And then from one minute onwards, my understanding is you don't have a ton more things. And so, to get persistent memory, this is what I don't understand, but for quantum money, my understanding is you need some form of persistent -- or something that can carry over. And so, that's an interesting thing.


But it's a high leverage issue for that reason where you can enable multiple things if you have better quantum memories. So that's number two in terms of cool problems that I think we're looking at and we're interested in.


The quantum memory one is more of a research interest. The first one is more like, hey, if someone builds this, you can enable commercial activity, and at least hackers start building.


But maybe to give just a very quick mental model, there's one that's about how can we enable people to build on quantum networks faster? And there's another kind of camp that is, how do we improve those networks in terms of their capabilities, their memories, the distance of the network, the compute capability, which is related to transducers as well.


And so, those are kind of the two broad areas. And the first one is more interesting in terms of if you can catalyze activity in that first one, we think it's going to impact that second one.


Anna Rose [01:15:46] Nice. Amazing. Alex, Nicola, thank you so much for coming on the show and covering that intersection between quantum and cryptography, sharing with us so many of the applications that are already being considered those of the future. This has been super interesting. Thank you so much.


Guillermo Angeris [01:16:05] Thank you, guys. Super fun.


Alex Obadia [01:16:06] Thanks for having us.


Nicola Greco [01:16:07] Hopefully soon. Quantum Crypto Podcast, QC Podcast.


Anna Rose [01:16:13]: Maybe Cryptopunk Podcast.


Guillermo Angeris [01:16:16] Yeah. I like if I have one contribution to the meme is I would say, how about computational cryptography and physical cryptography are the two distinctions.


Nicola Greco [01:16:27]: There you go.


Alex Obadia [01:16:28] I like that.


Anna Rose [01:16:29] Cool. Well, thanks again, guys.


I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik and Tanya.


And to our listeners, thanks for listening.
[a]The speaker says it wrong but yeah that is his name