
[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 0:21)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge, I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


[Anna Rose] (0:28 - 1:44)
This week, Tarun and I catch up with Sid and Cal from Payy. We talk about their private payment product, the focus they've put on building good UX for this one use case, how the evolution of ZK tooling allowed for it, the inner workings of the Visa remittance system, and a very detailed walkthrough of how Payy works under the hood.


We tap into a number of other related topics, like how the goal of self-sovereign money has been lost to speculation, why many of the new stablecoin projects seem to be a return to traditional finance, how privacy payments and well-built applications are making a comeback in 2025, and more.


Now before we kick off, I just want to make sure you're following our release of the ZK Whiteboard Sessions Season 3. These videos, produced by ZK Hack and supported by Bain Capital Crypto, feature our hosts Nico and Guillermo exploring the building blocks of the ZK systems we know and love.


We are currently releasing one module every two weeks. These can be found over on the Zero Knowledge Podcast YouTube channel. Subscribe there to be reminded, and we'll be adding the link to the show notes.


Now here is our interview with Sid and Cal from Payy.


Today, Tarun and I are here with Cal and Sid from Payy. Welcome to both of you.


[Calum Moore] (1:44 - 1:44)
Hi there.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:44 - 1:46) 
Hey. Excited to be here.


[Anna Rose] (1:46 - 1:47)
Cool. Hey Tarun.


[Tarun Chitra] (1:48 - 1:55)
Hey, excited to be back and talking about kind of the oldest application in crypto, but the still unsolved one.


[Anna Rose] (1:55 - 2:35)
Very much so. Cool. Quick disclosure, Tarun, you're an investor in Payy. I am also an investor through ZKV. Of course, nothing that we say is ever investment advice, et cetera.


We have been tracking this project for a while now, so it's very fun to get you on the show to dig in. Also, you've had some cool announcements recently. I think there's lots to talk about.


So I want to start by actually jumping into Payy. It's a project that I see as kind of tackling one of the age-old ZK applications, which is private payments. So what is Payy? This is Payy, spelt with two Ys, by the way, and what makes Payy unique?


[Sid Gandhi] (2:35 - 2:57)
Payy is digital cash, self-sovereign digital cash, the way it was supposed to be built. It is Bitcoin, but actually usable. It is something that we started working on in 2023 when payments, stablecoins, anything to do with that was very unsexy.


[Anna Rose] (2:57 - 2:58)
And also privacy.


[Sid Gandhi] (2:59 - 2:59)
And privacy.


[Anna Rose] (2:59 - 3:00)
It was very unpopular.


[Sid Gandhi] (3:00 - 4:06)
A little dangerous to work on, maybe even. And our belief is that true self-sovereign digital cash that's private is really the missing link between what Bitcoin's vision was and what its implementation should have been.


And we've built three insanely complex and yet simple to use technologies to solve this. The first one is Payy Network. Payy Network is a blockchain that allows for compliant and private stablecoin transactions.


We've also built Payy Wallet, which is the most usable stablecoin payments app. And it also functions as a bank account where you can use stablecoins to save, spend, and in the future, invest and borrow. And we've recently just shipped Payy Card. Payy Card is the first non-custodial crypto card with privacy built in, which makes it undoxable.


[Anna Rose] (4:06 - 4:27)
You're positioning it as a continuation on Bitcoin, which is funny to me because to me it would be a continuation on Zcash, which is the privacy payment application. That was what they were built for. Why do you not see that as part of the thread? Like you see yourself more as a successor to Bitcoin. Tell me a little bit about why that would be.


[Sid Gandhi] (4:28 - 5:00)
Yeah. It's a good question. I think Zcash took its primary directive of adding privacy to a Bitcoin-like system. That's not our primary directive. Our primary directive isn't privacy. Our primary directive is self-sovereign digital cash, and well, it turns out you have to have privacy in order to enable that at scale.


So that's why I think we're more of a continuation on Bitcoin. I mean, we're inspired by Zcash in many ways, but privacy is not our prime directive. It just happens to be something we believe is required.


[Anna Rose] (5:01 - 5:14)
Interesting.


And maybe, I mean, where Zcash is also an asset that can gain in value, like Bitcoin, in the case of the Payy payments, like those are stablecoins, so you're not investing in those stablecoins necessarily. It's not speculative.


[Sid Gandhi] (5:15 - 5:43)
Yeah. And I think removing speculation from crypto really forces you to make it usable. Because people will use the terrible products that we have in crypto, the janky workflows, all because of speculation and greed. And that's fine.


But really, the test of a real product is, do you actually solve a problem in someone's life and do it in a way that's really accessible to them?


[Anna Rose] (5:42 - 5:42)
Cool.


[Tarun Chitra] (5:43 - 5:48)
Okay. I have a boring but important question. Why the two Ys?


[Sid Gandhi] (5:49 - 6:03)
Really, of all the things, of all the things.


Okay. Actually, it was three Ys at the beginning, and Calum said three was too many. He said drop the Y, so I dropped one Y.


[Anna Rose] (6:04 - 6:06)
It's cleaner. Very nice.


[Sid Gandhi] (6:06 - 6:10)
It's cleaner. And then we ended up with P-A-Y-Y.


[Anna Rose] (6:10 - 6:10)
Cool.


[Tarun Chitra] (6:10 - 6:28)
Okay. I just feel like the audience sometimes needs to know etymology, especially in crypto, where the names just get crazier over time. Payy is like a name that's an easy name to understand, but then slightly crazy, it's like it has like the one streak of coloured hair or something, you know?


[Sid Gandhi] (6:28 - 6:32)
It's like your blue glasses.


[Tarun Chitra] (6:32 - 6:33)
Exactly. There you go.


[Sid Gandhi] (6:35 - 7:14)
Actually, there's one more tidbit I'll mention, since we're going into lore a little bit. I always believed we wanted to build this product that was loved by people, like almost a cult product. And what I realised was when we misspelled Payy with two Ys, it's almost like an if you know, you know, and you get to tell people.


You get to say, oh, I use Payy, it's Payy with two Ys. There's this extra, I think, ownership and connection over that. It's subtle.


But I've heard this in person and I've heard people say this in front of me, and it's kind of just a moment to own that and know something that someone else doesn't.


[Calum Moore] (7:15 - 7:20) 
And also, I cannot spell "Pay" the other way now. Every time I write it in a document, it's like P-A-Y-Y.


[Anna Rose] (7:20 - 7:20)
Autocorrect?


[Calum Moore] (7:21 - 7:21)
Damn it.


[Anna Rose] (7:22 - 7:28)
Oh, man. All right, Cal, I want to hear a little bit about you. What got you started, got you interested in this?


[Calum Moore] (7:29 - 8:18)
Yeah. I'll be totally honest. For me, it was, I got totally ZK-pilled. I kind of found this technology and I was like, this is incredible. This is nuts. This shouldn't be possible, like to be able to be able to do this. And always my blockchain experience was like, yeah, but how is this going to work? This is all great, but how do we get like consumers using this blockchain technology if you don't have privacy?


And I think for a long time, particularly when we started this, it was not a super popular idea that we would need privacy. And I think actually in recent months -- and maybe I'm skipping ahead here a little bit, but in recent months, because people can now use the payments in a real world, maybe on a card and they're starting to see that like, oh crap --


[Anna Rose] (8:18 - 8:19)
You want privacy.


[Calum Moore] (8:19 - 8:44)
You can't have this world exists without privacy, right? We don't have that -- it's not like your bank broadcasts all of your transactions today. We're taking a step backwards. And I think when you're just paying your friends for some food over crypto, like every now and then you can kind of have some good security ops and make it work.


But when you're doing everyday payments, it just does not work. So I guess for me, it was mostly about ZK.


[Anna Rose] (8:45 - 8:48)
Interesting. Before you started working with Sid, what were you doing?


[Calum Moore] (8:49 - 9:06)
Actually, it's kind of interesting story how we met. I was actually at YC when we met. And I was building a data analytics company and he was actually using the product and he kind of reached out and was just like, hey, this is cool, but you're missing this feature or something like that.


[Anna Rose] (9:07 - 9:09)
You're a power user with lots of feedback. Nice.


[Calum Moore] (9:11 - 9:46)
And then he was like, oh, I'm in California. And I was like, oh great. I'm at YC, I'm in California.


And he just took me in because it was actually a pretty lonely experience, being in California for the first time by myself. He was like, oh, I'll take you to the mountains and we'll just go for a walk. And we just started chatting about everything from blockchain, crypto, like where is the world at?


And I think some of those nearly initial conversations spurred our thinking of starting the company together. Because I think it was 2020 when we first met, and it wasn't until 2022 that we actually started the company together.


[Anna Rose] (9:46 - 10:27)
Cool. So I kind of want to do a bit more on this history with both of you.


Sid, you talked about sort of the Bitcoin story. You were using Zcash. But yeah, just recently I had Ian Miers on the show. And in that we talked about this early blockchain plus ZK combination and Zcash, the formation of Zcash.


The goal of Zcash has always been payment rail, payments for in private form. What did they do right and what did they do wrong? Why do you feel there needed to be an evolution?


I mean, they were also very early. They didn't have maybe the same tools that you guys have had. But why not build towards this -- like build on Zcash or something like that? Why build something new?


[Sid Gandhi] (10:27 - 10:52)
I think when we started this first principles approach to payments, we looked at everything that was out there, and we asked a simple question. Can I get my friends and family to use this product for payments? And the answer for Zcash was like, no. It was a resounding no.


And there's a few really strong reasons why. It's a fluctuating currency. So you can't --


[Anna Rose] (10:52 - 10:52)
It's not stable.


[Sid Gandhi] (10:52 - 11:25)
-- reasonably use that for payments. It's one of those attributes of money.


Second, it had this brand identity and reputation around these like privacy, but really deep privacy, and maybe you're not doing good things with it. Brand. And obviously, that's not something technical. That's a signalling and brand thing.


And then last, it was just really hard to use, right? So you had a few different Zcash wallets were really like -- they were kind of hard to set up.


[Anna Rose] (11:25 - 11:25)
Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (11:25 - 11:35)
You had to sync the chain. So I think it took like 30 minutes or an hour to -- like when you initially like started it. And then getting money in and out was super annoying.


[Anna Rose] (11:36 - 11:42)
And you had to move it from the unshielded to the shielded. It wasn't privacy by default actually.


[Sid Gandhi] (11:42 - 11:43)
Yeah. Exactly. 


[Calum Moore] (11:43 - 11:49)
And once it was shielded, it was like, okay, can I off-ramp this now because I went through the shielded pool?


[Sid Gandhi] (11:50 - 12:25)
Yeah. And that came up later as well with the compliance stuff where all the exchanges started banning off-ramping of shielded ZEC.


And we said, okay, obviously this is not usable. I think what Zcash got right was it is, to me, a very clear successor to Bitcoin for store of value. It is, in my opinion, the best private store of value, digital store of value in the world. But as we know with Bitcoin, store of value doesn't mean it's actually usable for payments or day-to-day things.


[Calum Moore] (12:25 - 13:13)
Yeah. And we love Zcash. We built -- we started with Halo2 because that was the right technology at the time. And I think we've moved a long way, particularly in the ZK world in terms of what the cutting edge and what's available now and what we can do now. And so that's also something that's changed.


I think the other thing with Zcash is it is supposed to be a Bitcoin successor, and it really does replicate Bitcoin, but make it private. And that's great if you want a Bitcoin, a store of value, which is what Bitcoin is great at.


But what Sid was mentioning is that Bitcoin doesn't really work for payments because the block time is too slow. I think for Zcash, it's like 2.5 minute block time. You go and pay for a sandwich, you got to stand there for two and a half minutes. It's just not going to work.


So I think that was the other reason we couldn't build on top of it from a technical level.


[Anna Rose] (13:14 - 13:31)
Cool. I think it actually might make sense for us to dig a little bit into the technical level. There's a bunch of questions that I have actually about the product and how the product works, but let's hold on that because you just mentioned having started with Halo2, but then exploring different tech stacks.


What does it look like today and how is Payy built?


[Calum Moore] (13:32 - 14:04)
Yeah. So we're in an L2 ZK Validium rollup. That means that we only post the root hash onto the L1 that we roll up to. That's Polygon today, but we could actually roll up to any chain, and we'll be adding that potentially in the future.


And it's essentially a big Merkle tree. So when you do a payment on Payy, you do a ZK proof on your phone. That's the primary way that you get privacy. So anyone who says you can get privacy without doing the zero-knowledge proof on your phone is lying to you. You have to have the proof on your phone.


[Anna Rose] (14:04 - 14:04)
Client-side.


[Calum Moore] (14:04 - 14:28)
Once you've done the proof on the phone, you have to have the client-side proof, and that gets sent to a sequencer who basically bundles all these transactions together and does one big proof that combines all of these other proofs together and then posts into the L1.


So that's kind of architecturally how Payy works. We have this big Merkle tree, and if your note is in the Merkle tree, then you have funds, if it's not in the Merkle tree, then you don't have the funds.


[Anna Rose] (14:28 - 14:46)
But if it's all local, how are you actually interacting with other individuals in this network? If you're only sending a proof to the sequencer showing some transactions, showing your balances, how does another user guarantee that you would have what you say you have?


[Calum Moore] (14:47 - 16:08)
Yeah. So the Merkle tree is public to everyone. So everyone can see this Merkle tree, which is basically a hash of hashes where each hash represents the money that you have, like your balance effectively. And it uses a UTXO model. So that's similar to Bitcoin, actually similar to Zcash. They use those models. So every hash represents some monetary value.


And then I obviously want to spend that money. Maybe I want to send it to you, Anna. What I do is I do a proof on my phone that says, hey, there is a hash that exists, everyone agrees this hash exists in the Merkle tree. I'm going to do a proof that says I'm not creating money or destroying money. I'm just going to maintain money so that the inputs that I put into this transaction and the outputs are going to match. That's what UTXO stands for.


It's basically saying that the monetary value going into the transaction is the same as the monetary value coming out. And then the ZK is basically just saying, did everything go correctly? And this is the new hash that you should post to the Merkle tree, and these are the hashes that should be nullified.


Now, when we first went live with Payy, we used a nullifier approach. So when you spend money, you couldn't actually link anything at all.


So you could make a payment, and that would be completely hidden because we create new -- rather than removing the old hashes from the tree, we created new hashes, which kind of meant you couldn't double spend that money.


[Anna Rose] (16:08 - 16:12)
But it totally obfuscated what was there before. But you've changed that. It's not like that anymore.


[Calum Moore] (16:13 - 16:37)
Yes. So we've changed that. And I think maybe we can kind of dive into some of the compliance stuff.


I think one of the big areas of compliance for us was how do we make a system that is as private as it possibly can be, but doesn't get wrecked.


And I think we've seen things with Zcash, for example, where you just can't get your money out once you've gone into a shielded pool.


[Anna Rose] (16:37 - 16:42)
Because of compliance reasons, because to take it out could taint your wallet or something.


[Calum Moore] (16:42 - 18:03)
To take it out, you just can't -- none of the off-ramp providers will accept it. Lots of the apps won't accept it from that point onwards. And so, something that's been really strong for me and Sid is always looking at, okay, how can we make this a really usable experience?


And we felt the best way to do this was to have a lineage that is basically open to everyone, but the transaction amounts, the transaction values, the transaction recipients and sender are all private. So I'm really -- taking a step back, why did we make the system the way we made it?


We have really one goal, which is to stop North Korea and people like North Korea from abusing the system. That's what we all want as a good system. And so we couldn't think of a better way to do that, to discourage them, but keep privacy for everyone else, than to keep the lineage, but keep everything else private.


For every user then at that point, there's nothing that I can look at, and say like, hey, you've done this or you've interacted with this person, because we use this UTXO model, every single note effectively has its own address, its own completely randomness, except for the fact that you can trace some lineage.


So if North Korea steals loads of money, puts it into Payy, you can trace that they just like try to use it as a mixer and took it out of the other end.


[Tarun Chitra] (18:03 - 18:56)
I think one interesting thing about the compliance aspect is, maybe we can start with the question of assuming that you wanted a credit card as the form factor that you wanted the end user to use, what is the minimal amount of compliance you need to get that off the ground?


So there's a sense in which a user on boards, they have to provide some private information, because obviously, the card issuer needs to know something. But then afterwards, what happens to that data? When I transition to being fully onchain, what data is remnant?


Walk us through the whole process. A user opens the app, the app looks great. They say, I want a card, what happens next? Because I really do think like, just that bait, the basic steps, while seemingly simple compared to some of the ZK stuff can actually be a little bit non-obvious to most people.


[Sid Gandhi] (18:56 - 21:25)
Yeah. It's quite complex, which is why it took us quite some time to build and launch this feature, because we wanted to build something truly novel and move the industry forward than just another crypto card, which there's a bunch of underlying providers. If you just want to build a regular crypto card on Base or Arbitrum or whatever, it's like a couple weeks, you just slap a UI together and it's there.


What we did was we created Payy Card as the first undoxable non-custodial crypto card. And what does undoxable mean?


So it means that you can't connect your KYC information to your Payy Network balance and transactions. Every other non-custodial card, there is one entity that has both of those pieces of information.


And today, Gnosis Pay or MetaMask Card or ether.fi Card are kind enough that they're not doxing everyone.


[Anna Rose] (19:55 - 19:57)
But it's dependent on their org.


[Sid Gandhi] (19:58 - 21:25)
As we progress in large scale adoption of crypto, the data analytics and exploitation problem becomes real.


Today, we have folks like TRM Labs and Arkham and other good folks indexing the blockchain, multiple chains, correlating things. I recently heard, this is not public yet, and I can't disclose who told me this, but I recently heard TRM Labs can now fully de-anonymise Railgun, and they use really advanced clustering algorithms and all sorts of stuff to do that.


And so, fundamentally, what we wanted to build was something undoxable, disconnect KYC from onchain identity. 


The way we did that is when you KYC with the Payy Card and all of your visa transactions, those are just TradFi. So imagine those Visa transactions are stored somewhere, the KYC stuff is stored somewhere. This is all according to privacy policies and it's GDPR compliant and all that stuff. That has to exist in order for a Visa card to be issued. There is just simply no other way.


But what we innovated on was saying, because we use Payy Network for each card transaction, we are able to disconnect that KYC information and your Visa card transactions from other Payy Network transactions. It's not connected to this Merkle tree.


[Anna Rose] (21:25 - 21:40)
It's not connected to the larger Merkle tree, the Payy Merkle tree, or it's not connected to your — but I thought you were going to say that it's really the ID component, this KYC, and your payments, like your own payments, those are not connected, right?


[Sid Gandhi] (21:40 - 21:52)
Yes. Those are not connected and neither is the public activity on the network can't be looked at, analysed, indexed and used to link it to you as a person or your card spending.


[Anna Rose] (21:52 - 22:07)
Maybe just to understand how this works, so the Visa transactions, this is using traditional rails. Are the Visa transactions connected to your KYC? Is it kind of like, I have a full Visa card and I'm KYC'd and Visa knows who I am and Visa knows my transactions?


[Sid Gandhi] (22:08 - 22:26)
Yes. You can't ship a Visa card without that. There's AML requirements. There's counter-terrorism financing requirements. You have to maintain that data for five years.


Every single Visa card issuer, whether they're crypto or not, has to store and maintain that data, and they have to connect it to your identity. There's no other way around that.


[Anna Rose] (22:26 - 22:44)
But then you talk about the transactions on Visa being connected to the blockchain transactions. How does that work anyway? Are you mimicking what's happening on the Visa network and then mapping it to this Merkle tree? Or is it happening at the same time on a device?


Yeah. How does that connection happen?


[Calum Moore] (22:44 - 24:18)
I think it's useful to compare it to what other cards are doing because that maybe helps to see where the differences lie.


So if you have another card that's just fully on the public open chain, then you can see where money is coming in, you can see that money being used in the wallet, and then you can see that those transactions being spent and being moved out of that wallet to be spent on Visa card transactions.


The way that it works on Payy is we non-custodially take reference of one of the hashes that exists. So you kind of say, hey, I have this hash that's in the Merkle tree, and that should allow me to -- you can produce proof, say, hey, this should allow me to spend this much money onchain. And basically you can withdraw that at any time.


So it's completely non-custodial. I can just say, hey, I want that back and do another transaction to get that money back. Or we can basically forward that money and off-ramp that money to the Visa effectively.


So we can only do two things with the ZK. We can either send it to Visa or the person can claim it back. We can't actually touch that money.


So when we come in, we look at that proof to say, oh, yes, they have the money. We then submit the transaction onchain to cover the cost of that Visa transaction. We actually do that within the one second time that you have, because our block finality is around one second.


We can actually issue that, get the response back from the network, and then authorize the transaction to Visa. And anything else that happens on Payy, you can't see anything else that happens on Payy at that time. I can't see how people got to that amount of money, how they got to that balance.


[Anna Rose] (24:18 - 24:54)
I want to kind of walk through a transaction because I just might not know how credit cards work that well. I don't know. I have a credit card -- I have a Payy credit card. I go to a store. I pay for something at the store. The store owner doesn't have crypto. It's not like behind the scenes crypto payments are going. They are just going to accept the Visa transaction.


I still don't fully get the connection to the Payy part of it and the private part of it. So really walk me through kind of like that. I have the card, I make a payment. Does it automatically at that moment take from a balance on Payy and do something to it?


[Calum Moore] (24:54 - 25:04)
Yes. So exactly. So when you sign up for the card programme, you effectively upload, as I said before, your money to Payy, but we can't spend it or do anything with it.


[Anna Rose] (25:04 - 25:15)
So this means you're taking -- maybe you're on an L1, you go change it into -- actually I wanted to ask you what token it is. Is it the standard stablecoin tokens or is it a native one?


[Calum Moore] (25:15 - 26:11)
Yes. So Payy Network is its own protocol. So we're not like ERC 20. We do USDC on Polygon. We bridge that and it gets basically replicated on the Payy Network.


So when you think of money on the Payy Network, it's really just like four values. Actually, a really nice way to think about how money works on the Payy Network is when you send a link. I don't know if you've ever used the Payy app to send a link to send money to someone, but the entire money is in that link.


So we actually store the private key. We store the value of that note, and we store the address of that note. And all of that information enables you to have the money at that time because you can do a transaction at any time with those three pieces of information. So I can do the proof and send it to the Merkle tree and it gets accepted.


So 10 people could have that same money, and until someone claims it, that money is kind of belongs to nobody. Like that money belongs -- it's just it's an ephemeral wallet effectively with this money in it. And I claim it and then no one else can spend it because I claimed it into a new wallet, which was my own wallet.


So when you're thinking about the Visa situation, they basically send us kind of one of these notes to say, hey, I have this money.


[Anna Rose] (26:25 - 26:27)
Who's they? Visa or the user?


[Calum Moore] (26:27 - 26:29)
So sorry, the phone --


[Anna Rose] (26:29 - 26:29)
The mobile user. Okay/


[Calum Moore] (26:30 - 26:48)
The mobile device, it sends this note to the Payy servers and the Payy stores that. And so Payy can spend that money on behalf of the user to cover the transaction that Visa is making, but we can only spend it by sending it to Visa or sending it back to the user. We can't extract that money.


[Anna Rose] (26:48 - 27:27)
Okay. Okay. But still, I want to -- let's continue to walk. So I think you shared it's USDC. So that's where it's like a stablecoin. But you kind of said "they" there and it was confusing because it's like when you use the card, does Visa send something saying, oh, we now have something. Do you sort of see my confusion?


I really want you to walk through exactly what is happening with one transaction, because you also kind of switched between card and mobile. I think the initial one was the client-side mobile, but if you're using a card, is the card making the proof? Is Visa making the proofs? I'm just kind of -- I'm confused.


[Tarun Chitra] (27:27 - 27:35)
Put another way, if you had to verbalise what the sequence diagram was of each interaction, what would it sound like?


[Anna Rose] (27:33- 27:34)
Yeah. Do it.


[Calum Moore] (27:35 - 29:02)
I'm going to go through it really slowly. Okay. So you tap the card on the machine at a terminal. That sends a request to Visa. Visa forwards the request onto us and they say like, does this user have the money?


Now, if we say yes to Visa, they just allow that transaction to go through. And then they actually come a week later to come in like actually claim the money from us.


[Anna Rose] (27:57- 27:57)
Got it.


[Calum Moore] (27:58 - 29:02)
So they'll be like, hey, are you authorised? So it's called an authorisation. It's like you're authorising users to spend up to a certain amount of money.


The whole card programme network, by the way, is completely nuts. People can overcharge. So you can authorise for $10 and they can just go in and be like, oh, actually, I want to charge $20 and that you just have to accept it.


So there's all these different systems that you kind of have to play with when you're dealing with a Visa card network. That's part of where the complexity comes from.


But let's just say it's a normal flow. So we've authorised, they've sent a request to us. We say, hey, yeah, the user has the money. How do we check that the user has the money?


Well, ahead of time, the user, when they've got the Payy Card, the phone is communicating with our servers and they are sending this proof basically that they have the money, that they can send the money.


And so we have this note on our server and we can actually execute the proof on our servers, and we do that during the authorisation process. So the request comes into us, we hold that request. We do a proof on the Payy Network to say, hey, move this money into another non-custodial place, basically in Visa's fund --


[Anna Rose] (29:02 - 29:10)
Right as the charge happens. So even though Visa's coming a week later on your side, to the user, their funds are gone. They're out of their account.


[Calum Moore] (29:11 - 29:35)
Yeah. And so the idea is that the ZK allows for certain rules to take place so that it can still be sent back to the user because it could be refunded. So we still need to -- but we want the user to not be able to spend that money at that moment, because we've got to protect that money. It's kind of an escrow at that moment in time.


And then once Visa tells us a week later, yeah, everything looks good on our side, then we can move the money all the way to Visa, or if not, we can send it back.


[Anna Rose] (29:36 - 29:39)
Cool. Okay. I think that really helped. Yeah. Thank you.


[Calum Moore] (29:39 - 29:39)
Sorry.


[Anna Rose] (29:40 - 29:57)
And the connection between these two then, on your side, you're dealing mostly with like ZKPs within the Payy Network, but the connection point to Visa is these non-custodial entities, but that Visa can actually call, like Visa can trigger --


[Calum Moore] (29:57 - 30:12)
We do it on behalf -- so we're taking the liability risk, but we know that everything is safe because we're doing that transaction onchain. So we know that there's no risk. But Visa doesn't care about that. They just care that Payy as an entity is going to cover the money that someone's spending on the card.


[Anna Rose] (30:12 - 30:20)
And they've already KYC'd their users. So they feel -- or like the users of this card, so they're not worried about the funds being from sketchy sources.


[Sid Gandhi] (30:20 - 30:25)
Well, they've done two things. They've KYB'd PolyBase Labs.


[Anna Rose] (30:25 - 30:25)
You guys.


[Sid Gandhi] (30:25 - 30:34)
They have also -- we've also been audited by Visa. So this is a fully audited and Visa-approved system that we've built.


[Anna Rose] (30:34 - 30:34)
Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (30:35 - 30:47)
So when you authorise a transaction, you actually make a contract. It's part of a contract between PolyBase Labs and Visa that if you say "yes" to a transaction, you have to send Visa the money.


[Anna Rose] (30:47 - 30:47)
I see.


[Sid Gandhi] (30:47 - 30:51)
If we don't send Visa the money, they can come after us and collect that money.


[Anna Rose] (30:51 - 30:51)
Okay.


[Sid Gandhi] (30:52 - 31:04)
So that's why we have to be extra vigilant and make sure we're doing that proof at the exact time that the authorization is coming in. So the user can't double spend. They can't tap and then send a Payy link at the same time.


[Anna Rose] (31:04 - 31:05)
True. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Interesting.


[Tarun Chitra] (31:06 - 31:48)
One question, you mentioned you have the liability -- it's sort of like in some ways you're kind of lending the user money and sort of holding the liability that you own to Visa at the same time. Is there ever kind of a race condition, though, like what you're describing where, say, the Visa network is much slower than normal, or the payment doesn't go through, where somehow the Payy link plus the Visa -- like how do you deal with that type of issue? 


Because I could imagine there's almost race conditions where Visa is too slow to process, but you've already processed the onchain piece or vice versa. How do you kind of deal with that, and/or chargeback type of behaviour?


[Calum Moore] (31:48 - 32:17)
Yeah. So, I mean, in the case where the user is too slow and we've already processed the transaction, we can just send that back to the user. So we have the capability to send the money back to the user at that point. It's like holding escrow until Visa give us that final decision to do that.


And as I said, if we are able to do the onchain transaction in time, the transaction would be declined. So obviously our goal is to ensure that we can always do it in that period of time so that it's not declined.


[Tarun Chitra] (32:17 - 32:37)
Okay. Cool. And then how do you deal with chargebacks? Because you do have to handle that as one of the edge cases.


Is there anything special about dealing with that in the ZK sense? That was sort of more of my question. Or is it just like it's just a kind of invalid escrow return to state before type of behaviour?


[Calum Moore] (32:38 - 33:04)
Yeah. I think in that specific case, it's just like a separate process where it's kind of a bit more of a flow where Visa gives us the money and we just mint some money on our network from that money and we send it to the user directly.


It generally only goes that way, as a chargeback back to the user, which is a net positive for us and our network and for the user. So Visa just says, oh, you gave us this money, but here's the money back.


[Tarun Chitra] (33:03 - 33:03)
Okay. Cool.


[Sid Gandhi] (33:04 - 33:25)
If you really want to get confused, what happens when you go to a restaurant, your bill is $100, you tip $20, but the first authorisation they charge for was actually only $100.


So we all know this dance. You go to the restaurant, they give you the bill, you give them the card, they swipe the card, you come back, you add the tip, they go back.


[Anna Rose] (33:26 - 33:26)
Oh, yeah.


[Calum Moore] (33:27 - 33:29)
I'd like to say this is a dance you only do in America. Like no other country has this dance. Every other country is like you authorise for a certain amount and you pay the amount. Just the US is like, oh, no, you can just like --


[Anna Rose] (33:39 - 33:40)
That's true. That's funny.


[Sid Gandhi] (33:40 - 34:19)
And then if you want to get even more confused -- sorry, I'll point, because these are all edge cases we had to deal with and didn't realise how complex these fiat networks are, but not to poo poo on the fiat networks, they're complex for a reason.


So, for example, you have refunds, you have partial refunds, you have a completed transaction that can later be refunded, versus an in-progress transaction that can be refunded within a certain time frame.


So there's all these weird edge cases and money flows that actually are quite challenging to deal with. But on the other side, you have a non-custodial and immutable system.


[Anna Rose] (34:20 - 34:20)
Wow.


[Sid Gandhi] (34:20 - 35:10)
So it's a lot of the complexity. It's something that I think when you first think about crypto cards, it's actually really easy to do a crypto card on a public network because basically the whole account is public.


And so anyone can just see all the transactions, which is really beneficial for reconciliation, obviously really bad as a consumer.


And so all of these challenges and all of these fundamental things we had to build was because we have a private UTXO-based payment network on the other side. But it's a huge moat for us because there are no other crypto card provider can just slap on privacy. It's simply not possible.


You have to fundamentally design it that way, and then all these authorisation flows with Visa, they have to be updated. And that I mean, Calum can speak to it was a massive undertaking.


[Tarun Chitra] (35:11 - 36:04)
So actually, maybe walking people through the design of why you chose a rollup and how you kind of designed that to meet those goals. Because I think if you think about historical private payments, there's just been so many versions of this that people have tried


But somehow it turned out that having some of the flexibility from a rollup was important for you for dealing with some of these interactions versus kind of having, I don't know, I guess it's somewhat ironic, I guess, Visa wrote all these like Zether type of papers historically which never got really used for private payments dealing with chargebacks and stuff, whereas it did seem like the rollup form factor actually helped you in some ways.


And so maybe walking through A, the design, and B, the decisions of why do a rollup? Why did it make it easier for going from zero to one?


[Calum Moore] (36:05 - 39:27)
I mean, we at Payy, we didn't actually want to build a blockchain at the beginning. That wasn't really our ambition necessarily. It was to make payments work.


And we looked at all the different things and criteria that we would need to make a payment system work. And to us, nothing else worked than a ZK validium rollup with privacy enabled in it. And so there are a couple of attributes that you're looking for.


Firstly is obviously the privacy element that you need. And I think, as Sid mentioned, it's very, very hard to overlay privacy on an existing public chain, because they're so designed to be public. It's like even with Tornado Cash, you have to have this whole relayer system to enable these private transactions to occur, because the moment you're interacting onchain, you're using an address and you're exposing some information about yourself.


Even IPs can be tracked, like in terms of, okay, this particular IP is updating this particular account in a frequent way. Oh, they're in this location. Oh, this is probably this person. And so there's all these different ways in which you can leak privacy out of yourself.


And so, having a UTXO model, which is really the only way to have true privacy, was really important to us.


I think when you're dealing with privacy, a rollup also just makes sense. I kind of say to everyone, if you're dealing with a privacy system, you'll almost certainly need a Merkle tree.


I think it should just be assumed baked in that you're going to have a Merkle tree because almost all of ZK is reasoning about some piece of information that exists. It's you're never actually doing computation to get an answer. You're doing computation to assert certain things against some data that exists.


So it's like, okay, this data exists. Do I have enough money? Am I old enough? Do I have this authorisation? Do I have this token?


And so any ZK framework you should use should just be baked into a Merkle tree because that's just the assumption that that's what you have to use.


And the other one is performance. So I know it's not sexy. And I know it's like some people -- well, we've solved performance in crypto. So don't you worry about that? For me, I think we really haven't solved it in dealing with these massive payment networks. Like doing 10,000 transactions per second of ZK proofs, having something where you can have a system which is highly refined for using ZK.


Like our transaction times, the reason we can do it in one second, the reason that we can do the transaction whilst waiting for the Visa authorisation is only because we have our own network and we control our own block time.


And we can verify a proof in 0.7 milliseconds or less to verify a proof on our network. To verify a proof, any other chain takes an enormous amount longer because it's not optimised for that use case.


So even on things like Ethereum -- we tried to launch originally rolling up to Solana and I like Solana and I think Solana is great, but it just wasn't set up for ZK, especially at the time. So you couldn't fit a verification of a proof on one block in Solana. It would overflow the block. You have to split it up and put it into five or six blocks.


And so that was kind of the reason for going with the design that we went for, I would say, is the privacy element, the performance element.


[Sid Gandhi] (39:28 - 41:01)
Yeah. And I think I'll insert like one or two more things. We're asserting that this is the only way to build a usable private payments network. It's a pretty big assertion. But we have 15 years of proof that every other way doesn't work.


People have tried insane types of weird architectures and things like that. No one's ever built a private payment product that my family and friends can use, and no one has ever built it to connect to Visa.


And I'll make another assertion here. Doing that will take, I think, other people at least 2 years, if not more, because it's just incredibly hard. You have to make these tradeoffs that are uncomfortable. You have to really focus in on just usability and not get distracted by the hype of the next trend that's going to happen.


Right now, it's stablecoins and payments, but next year it's going to be something else. And all the stablecoin chains will be abandoned and people will move on and raise other rounds.


And there's no proof, there's no evidence that that's not going to happen. In fact, all the evidence points to next year there's going to be a new trend and all these chains will become ghost chains. And we, for 2 years, have just been working on this, even though it's been unsexy.


And for the foreseeable future, until billions of people are using self-sovereign digital cash that's private, we're going to continue working on this. And I think we're one of the few teams that can actually say we're going to do that.


[Tarun Chitra] (41:01 - 41:55)
So actually, you bring up this the stablecoin chain thing, obviously, with all these people kind of like Circle and Stripe launching their own chains. What do you think the failure mode of privacy is for a new L1 versus an L2? This is kind of what I was trying to get at, I guess, in terms of the design decisions you made.


Obviously, you gave an example of, hey, maybe like the memory allocation on the L1 is not sufficient in the way that you couldn't execute a full verification of a single transaction, or like the opcodes aren't optimised for doing this in an efficient way in some sense.


But I'm kind of curious what you think the L1 versus L2 failure modes are, and sort of what some of the harder things were to get right that you think will inevitably much be harder if you had to start from scratch on a new network.


[Sid Gandhi] (41:55 - 42:42)
I think I'll mention one overview item, and I think Calum probably has good details on this. So the overview item is, I think there's a big difference between corporate stablecoin chains and everything else.


So with Circle, with Stripe, those two chains are going to be tremendously successful. They don't really have to convince crypto Twitter. They don't have to launch a token. They don't have to do anything. They will be fundamentally and inherently successful because these companies control massive amounts of flows.


The thing is, all of these stablecoin chains are built for bulk settlement. In bulk settlement, you don't need privacy. And or if you have a corporate chain, Circle can just provide the privacy, in a TradFi --


[Anna Rose] (42:42 - 42:43)
Yeah, like an exchange.


[Sid Gandhi] (42:44 - 43:52)
Exactly. In a TradFi exchange sense. So I don't think there really is a failure mode for Tempo. I don't think there's a failure mode for Arc. I think they're just going to have tremendous amounts of funds flowing through there.


I think the question we have to ask ourselves is, is that going to create self-sovereign digital money for people and bring the power of controlling your money from institutions back to people?


Because at the end of the day, that's what all of this is about. It's about a power play to take power from institutions and give it to people. That's literally for the last 15 years, that's what this should have been about, and I think the answer is no with those corporate chains.


All the other stablecoin chains, I think it's a big question on do they have the real conviction to continue building this in the coming 5, 10 years, which is how long it's going to take to roll this out to billions of people when all of them only launched once stablecoins became sexy.


So I think you just have to think about that and reason about that. It's up to the listener to decide. Ta-da!


[Anna Rose] (43:53 - 43:53)
Fair.


[Calum Moore] (43:54 - 44:39)
I would also say on those corpo chains, I imagine that they're going to do a great job of helping big companies learn how to be onchain. And then they're going to see, oh, actually we can do the real thing and they can instantaneously move themselves over.


It kind of reminds me of the early internet days where all these universities were having their own intranets or the companies would have their own intranets. And then it was like, oh, actually it's much better if we can just connect with everything else rather than being on this protected corporate chain.


And so I do think it's going to be a stepping stone for a lot of companies to kind of get their feet wet in crypto and in blockchain technology, and then they're going to move across to the real thing.


[Tarun Chitra] (44:39 - 45:08)
You guys didn't address the one thing, though, which is, will they preserve privacy in a corpo chain? It's right now just like a promise, oh, we'll have some private transactions.


But I actually don't think their incentives are really aligned for them to really ever have privacy. So that was more what I was trying to get at is like, do you think they will ever actually be able to really offer private transactions in the same way you are? Or do you think actually it's more like lip service?


[Sid Gandhi] (45:08 - 46:28)
I think the clear answer that I can give is no. I think the real answer is more nuanced in that they're not going to be able to win corporate clients if they tell a CFO of a Fortune 5000 or Fortune 500 company, by the way, your payments are fully public, because they're going to find out.


So I think right now it's a tool to say, yes, we have it. I read the Arc white paper. There's all of three sentences on privacy. And it basically says, we think we're going to use TEEs, but don't worry, it's going to be modular and we'll think about it later. You can go read it right now. I swear to God, that's what it says.


And I think the point is to just have air cover to win these enterprise contracts and to convince other institutions to work with them.


To be honest, they'll figure it out. They'll do some TEE system. They'll do some, probably not ZK because it's just too hard, and it doesn't fit with EVM, but they'll do something. Or they'll do proxy accounts or smart contract bulk settlement accounts or whatever it is, weird ways to get "privacy."


But no, I don't think they're going to have self-sovereign digital cash privacy. And to be honest, I don't think their customers, their real customers, are going to even care until it's too late.


[Anna Rose] (46:29 - 47:03)
In the case of these stablecoin issuers, though, will those stablecoins end up in Payy eventually? Do you interface with them potentially in the future? I mean, you're already interfaced with USDC, so you are maybe it's not your -- you're not issuing it. I'm guessing you're getting it from somewhere else. But it's like, would you import that?


Because on the issuance side, I mean, Payy doesn't care. You can still have the private payments using those assets, even if they've been issued by some public chain, because it's not like the people who are always using them have gone through the steps of generating these stablecoins.


[Calum Moore] (47:03 - 47:16)
That actually brings us back to the L2, L1 point a little bit, because that distinction between an L1 and L2, I always find a little bit weird because people make such a big deal out of it. Are you an L1, are you an L2, are you an L3? And it's like, it's really such a small...


[Anna Rose] (47:16 - 47:18)
You're an L3, actually, aren't you?


[Calum Moore] (47:19 - 48:25)
I mean, it depends whether you call Polygon an L1 or a sidechain or an L2. It really depends. But actually, a rollup is really just a ZK bridge at the end of the day.


So if you have your own security -- so what makes you an L1 is security. If you have your own security, you're an L1 and whatever you do to other chains is a bridge. If you take the security from another chain, you're a rollup. That's the primary difference between those two things.


And so I think long term, the goal is for Payy to become bridges to these other L1s and for us to be able to access liquidity on any of these other chains, because then you can just seamlessly bridge it on because we can verify the proofs on any EVM chain.


You can effectively turn your L2 or L3 into an L1 by adding the security layer on top. And that's what the token is going to enable. So we'll take the sequencer, we'll decentralise the sequencer. There'll be a token that powers that decentralisation. And then all of the -- instead of being a rollup, we become a ZK bridge to all these other networks.


[Sid Gandhi] (48:25 - 49:24)
And I think your question was like, what is the model for assets moving across these networks? So something I imagine will happen is Tempo will eventually host an asset that's like a payment receivable asset from Stripe.


You could imagine they're going to like tokenize their payment receivables. They're going to put them on Tempo and there's going to be some cool like DeFi stuff you can do with that.


You can actually just wrap those tokenized deposits or tokenized receivables on the Payy Network. You could do that today if we just built the bridge to Tempo and then we just added a config on our side to allow that token type.


And so that's very simple for us. We just view ourselves as the destination layer where you can actually use assets onchain in a reasonable and private and usable way.


Where those assets originate from, what economic security is on other chains versus our chain, that's all, I think, a distinction, but it doesn't really make a difference.


[Tarun Chitra] (49:25 - 49:47)
I think the reason I'm bringing this up is, if you go through Arc or Tempo, they explicitly state that they need their own L1 oftentimes justified in some ways by privacy and validator reordering. Basically, if I distilled everything down to two things of like why launch your own from scratch? Those are like the two main things.


[Anna Rose] (49:47 - 49:52)
It's being able to work with a validator set in the case you have to roll something back and privacy.


[Tarun Chitra] (49:53 - 50:00)
Yes. That's basically -- as far as I can summarise my understanding, that's basically the only two things they care about.


[Sid Gandhi] (50:01 - 50:02)
So not a blockchain.


[Tarun Chitra] (50:02 - 50:07)
And in some ways you're like -- yeah, exactly. And in some ways it's kind of --


[Calum Moore] (50:07 - 50:07)
The one thing.


[Tarun Chitra] (50:08 - 50:35)
And so I guess the reason I think that's interesting is that notion is being called L1 sufficiency or L1 necessity. You need to be an L1 to do that.


But at some level, you're not even an L1 then, to your point earlier, is like, it does feel like it's a little more kind of a centralised --


[Anna Rose] (50:25 - 50:26)
POA.


[Tarun Chitra] (50:26 - 50:27)
POA.


[Anna Rose] (50:27 - 50:27)
Yeah.


[Calum Moore] (50:28 - 50:28)
It's just a database.


[Tarun Chitra] (50:28 - 50:30)
Yeah. It's a database.


[Sid Gandhi] (50:30 - 51:22)
Yeah. Can we be honest about this? Can we just really be honest about this? It's a database with the air cover for Stripe to say, hey, don't worry, it's a blockchain, so you can trust us and it's going to be neutral.


Because if they did that on a Postgres server, people would not trust it. People only trust the Postgres -- or they're not even Postgres. What does JP Morgan run? Oracle or some weird thing inside of a COBOL server or whatever. People trust that. People are like, okay, when JP Morgan says it's in their database and it's this amount, everyone's like, great, we believe that.


If Stripe did it, some people would believe it, but a lot of people wouldn't. And so what a blockchain allows them to do is to compete with a banking ledger for legitimacy. But I think anyone that's been around knows that that is purely a control play and has nothing to do with technology or capability.


[Anna Rose] (51:23 - 51:44)
And that privacy component, though, just going back to what you're saying, Tarun, this idea that one of the reasons you do the L1 is also for this privacy. I mean, in discussing it, it sounded like privacy will probably be an afterthought. How are they currently planning on offering it? Just by being a blockchain does not give you privacy. It's pseudo-anonymity, but like --


[Tarun Chitra] (51:44 - 51:49)
I think the thing is, you're never going to have privacy from the validators in all of these setups.


[Anna Rose] (51:49 - 51:53)
Privacy from the validators. Okay. It could be privacy from the public, but not from the validators.


[Tarun Chitra] (51:53 - 52:23)
Yes. Exactly. Fundamentally, you're going to be able to -- the validators can either collude or, depending on the architecture, individually decode the transactions before they reach the TEE. So I don't really see how you're going to have end-to-end privacy.


You're going to have this kind of like, it's private when I send it, perhaps it's private to the public posted chain, but the validators can definitely, or should be able to read, maybe not easily, maybe they have to do a bunch of work to do it, but my suspicion is like that's sort of the threat model.


[Sid Gandhi] (52:23 - 52:27)
I think the validators aren't going to have any incentive to do this, because they're all Stripe's friends.


[Anna Rose] (52:28 - 52:29)
What, incentive to offer privacy?


[Tarun Chitra] (52:29 - 52:30)
No, no, to decode.


[Sid Gandhi] (52:30 - 52:30)
To decode.


[Anna Rose] (52:31 - 52:31)
Oh, to decode.


[Sid Gandhi] (52:31 - 52:50)
Like if I'm a validator on Stripe's network and the fees on the network are paid to me, likely, first of all, that's not going to cover -- the fees are so low that it's actually not going to cover a computation cost. So I'm doing it just to build some kind of relationship with Stripe or whatever.


I'm not going to shoot him in the foot by selling that data or decoding that data.


[Tarun Chitra] (52:50 - 53:07)
Yes. The difference is more like if a government came and was like, oh, we think this is secretly an entity controlled by a sanctioned entity or whatever. I think like you basically run into the like, okay, our only compliance tool is having the validators decrypt everything.


[Anna Rose] (53:07 - 53:07)
And they could.


[Sid Gandhi] (53:08 - 53:11)
Yeah. I mean, in that case, they would be legally compelled to do so.


[Tarun Chitra] (53:11 - 53:20)
I'm just saying that like -- that's what I mean. It feels like the L1 is not really necessary for this type of privacy. It's just a cover type of thing.


[Sid Gandhi] (53:20 - 53:47)
I think it would just be kind of like if Stripe was like, oh, yeah, we're going to use Ethereum or we're going to use Solana, it would just be like, it wouldn't make sense because institutions could just directly use Ethereum or Solana, and they would have already if it was valuable to them.


So I think it would be a non-event or a non-product for them to do that. And so they have to create some product. They have to create something new that exists. And the only reasonable thing to do is clone EVM.


[Anna Rose] (53:47 - 53:52)
Isn't the reason that they launched also just because everyone looks at Tether and goes like, I want that?


[Tarun Chitra] (53:53 - 54:05)
I mean, there is truth to that. But if you look at the graveyard of stablecoins, I'm not sure that there is a way to summit Mount Tether. It might be the world's most inhospitable mountain.


[Anna Rose] (54:06 - 54:40)
I want to go back to the Payy system, the Payy system itself. And you had mentioned earlier these edge cases and all of these things that you built to manage them, but you didn't actually say how you do it. So I don't think we need to go through each one, but I would love to check out how you're doing one of them.


Cal, thank you so much for earlier, walking through exactly what one of those things looks like, like a transaction and how quickly and what's happening, and it's a week later. This is really good.


But what about that case where -- what did you -- pick a really complicated one, and then tell me how you actually solved that.


[Calum Moore] (54:40 - 54:42)
Specifically for the card programme?


[Anna Rose] (54:42 - 54:42)
Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (54:43 - 54:45)
Let's do partial refunds. That's a fun one.


[Anna Rose] (54:45 - 54:49)
Something like that. You had mentioned a bunch of weird edge cases. I like them.


[Calum Moore] (54:49 - 55:18)
Okay. Partial refunds. So for a partial refund, it's actually interesting because in a card programme, you get basically two different things. You get a refund if it happens within that 7-day period.


So as I mentioned before, you get the authorization, and then you get 7 days later, Visa says, yeah, everything went well and you can claim it up.


But what happens when you go back to the store and you want to get a refund on the 8th day or the 9th day? Because most stores will actually give you a refund 30 days later.


[Anna Rose] (55:19 - 55:21)
So it's gone through and Visa's been paid.


[Calum Moore] (55:21 - 56:06)
Everything's done. And so from Visa's perspective, they forget about that transaction as if it never existed. You can't touch it. You can't change it. It's ledgered in their system. It is actually a true kind of blockchain thing from their perspective, like you cannot change it.


[Anna Rose] (55:34 - 55:35)
Immutable. Okay.


[Calum Moore] (55:35 - 56:06)
It's immutable. Yeah. It's immutable. If you want to do a refund, they're just like, oh, hey, this company wants to send some money. And they don't tell you that it's actually a refund. They're just like it's a negative transaction.


So obviously you have to detect that, okay, this is negative money. They're sending me some money. You then have to show like, okay, this is the same vendor as I had before. Okay, like linking that up. You also have to think, does this make sense? Because you can also get a refund to a completely different card, and that's a valid thing to do.


[Anna Rose] (56:06 - 56:06)
Oh, wow, yeah.


[Calum Moore] (56:06 - 56:35)
So you can go to a hotel, pay with one card and then be like, oh, I lost that card. I actually want it. So that would be a high risk scenario where you would have to think about whether you want to allow that transaction to go through.


And there's a different risk factors and vectors that you want to look at there, about whether you authorise that transaction.


Again, we only get say at the authorisation. So we have to make a really quick, sharp assessment as to whether we think this is a good transaction or a bad transaction during that one second period.


[Anna Rose] (56:35 - 56:43)
Would partial refund just be like Visa sends your escrow account money and then you guys have to figure out where it goes? Is that kind of how you deal with it?


[Calum Moore] (56:44 - 57:17)
So a partial refund is actually what we would consider a true refund, which is that in fact, they just really just send a new transaction through, and just be like, oh, hey, the amount changed. They don't really -- they don't tell you any new information with it. They're just like, oh, hey, this is the amount we're charging now.


And they can do that within that 7-day period until they complete. And that completion can take anywhere from one day, or it can take up to two weeks. So it's a variable period, and we obviously have to manage that.


But if it's within that period before completion, they just change the amount. And then they're like, okay--


[Anna Rose] (57:17 - 57:21)
Oh, yeah. Within the 7 days, they just change the amount. But if it's after that, what do you do?


[Calum Moore] (57:22 - 57:30)
Again, they just give you the money. They're just like, hey, this transaction just came through and they don't link it with anything else that's happened. They're just like, hey, we're going to give you some money.


[Anna Rose] (57:30 - 57:45)
But how do you -- I mean, this is kind of going back to that question of which part of the system is private. How do you know which part of the Merkle tree to reimburse? I know that's not how it works, but how do you actually then move those funds back to the correct address?


[Calum Moore] (57:46 - 57:56)
Yeah. So we have, I guess, an address system that we can use to send funds back to the user. The address system doesn't mean anything because we can't see any addresses, as I mentioned before.


Address is like a weird concept. So basically when the app pings online, we have an ID that we use that we associate with a KYC card user. And when the app comes online, it basically says like, hey, I'm this ID and they send a proof.


One of the cool things is we don't actually use passwords or anything else. We send a proof for authentication. So the phone does a proof to be like, hey, I want to log into this system. And it's like, I know this private key. That's the proof is like -- the most simple proof is literally just private key hashed is the address.


And they send that through and they're like, okay, this is my address. We link that address with the KYC, but that's not linked to anything onchain that we can see. We can't see any addresses onchain.


[Anna Rose] (58:37 - 58:39)
But you are sending sort of funds back and forth.


[Calum Moore] (58:40 - 58:40)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (58:40 - 58:53)
Is there ever a case where you end up -- basically the question I'm kind of leading towards is like, is there ever a case where you've put more into something and you're actually earning off that thing? Does that ever exist in this system?


[Sid Gandhi] (58:54 - 59:27)
So I think your question was in this card settlement system, does that exist? And the answer is no. We don't mess around with trying to optimize yield on these -- we have like one hundred dollars for half a day, we're trying to get yield on it type stuff. That really only works at bank scale and make meaningful money. So and I don't think we want to do that anyways.


What we are going to launch is the ability to earn yield. We haven't announced through which protocols or methods, and that's going to be really, really cool announcement. And so we'll hold off on that.


But yes, yield is coming.


[Tarun Chitra] (59:27 - 1:00:05)
Can we walk through the mechanics, though? Because I do think it's kind of important for people to understand, like I'm on the roll up, I have private assets, but I'm going into a public yield-bearing pool or a public yield-bearing set of assets.


So there has to be some shielding and sort of pooling mechanism, maybe like Tornado looking in some way or not. How do you envision the kind of like, I have shielded asset, I go into a pool and then I go to a transparent public pool that's earning yield, and then I kind of come back and I -- walk us through that process, because I do think that is something that is novel that a lot of existing ZK stuff hasn't really done.


[Calum Moore] (1:00:05 - 1:01:27)
Yeah. So I mean, anything on Payy Network is effectively pooled. So the USDC that we hold is pooled on Polygon. So we use Polygon USDC. So that it'll be the same, effectively, we'll do the same for the asset that we use for the yield-bearing token.


So all of the money that's on Payy Network is actually pooled into one pot. So when you want to bring on that yield-bearing token onto Payy Network, it gets added to a pool. And once it's on Payy Network, there's no visibility as to which specific user has how much of that pool.


I think one thing that's really interesting about our position is there's a lot of other apps out there who potentially want to do a card programme and they need to make money from that card programme. Our vision is much bigger than a card programme.


A card is one component of being a non-custodial bank, and that's really our goal is to provide all the services and things that you would expect.


And so I think our long-term goal is really not to make money on the card programme. There's many other ways our network will generate funds for us without us having to do that. So all of the fees that you would normally pay and all of the things like interchange, for example, we're going to give that back to users.


So I think there's a lot of things that we can do because of the way we're positioned.


[Anna Rose] (1:01:28 - 1:01:52)
It's funny you say that about the card, because actually one of my questions was a little bit about the competition on the card front.


I think pretty soon after you launched, there was another card that rolled out with the same colour from another network who maybe won't be named. But I wondered kind of what differentiates you, what keeps people on it?


And maybe I'm a little focused on this card and you're saying, well, this is just one component.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:01:53 - 1:02:11)
Yeah. It was funny. And by the way, it wasn't a real launch. Someone posted a few like graphics of branding, but they were, oh, like a card.


And then I don't know why they said also privacy on there, because they said it's going to be no KYC and you can't do a real Visa card without KYC. You can do gift cards, by the way.


[Anna Rose] (1:02:11 - 1:02:12)
Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:02:12 - 1:03:10)
But the UX around gift cards is really bad, and they're very limited on where you can use them.


Anyway, so back to your question, what's the differentiator? I think it is privacy and fundamentally that is ZK. And like we've mentioned, it's really hard for other people to add this in as a feature.


And so I think it's a very large moat for us. And I think as more and more people start using crypto, in their daily lives, it's going to come to a head where there's going to be a moment, just we had with online data privacy, and Facebook using data to do election data analysis and propaganda and all that kind of stuff, like Cambridge Analytica.


That's going to happen in crypto and it's inevitable. It's so easy to index. And we already have Google indexing multiple blockchains. Pretty sure Facebook is doing that, too. I've heard whispers of this. I don't know for sure, given they do have blockchain talent kind of there.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:11 - 1:03:12)
They used to. Yeah. I mean, Google does now, but Facebook used to.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:03:15 - 1:03:32)
Yeah. From what I know, the team is very small, but they still have those people there. And by the way, I've mentioned this once or twice, but I want to really mention it here.


Today, stablecoin payments are financial transactions that are fully public and visible onchain. Like send USDC on Ethereum, whatever.


According to GDPR and other data privacy laws, financial payment data needs to be protected in a way that it is not public. That's literally written in GDPR. It's law in the EU and its law in many states in the US.


[Anna Rose] (1:03:51 - 1:03:52)
Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:03:52 - 1:04:02)
I don't know how anyone's reconciling those two facts. And so the big question I would pose is, are stablecoins even legal without privacy?


[Anna Rose] (1:04:03 - 1:04:13)
Because once they're stablecoins, they're not these funny assets with value that fluctuates. It's considered a financial transaction only, not like a purchase.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:04:14 - 1:04:37)
Yeah. If I send you a stablecoin, that's a payment. And if it's fully public or someone's enabling me to make this transaction, and it's fully public, they're not sufficiently protecting the data for a payment system, which is something that's required by GDPR.


Just want to put that out there and stew on it and think about what that means.


[Tarun Chitra] (1:04:38 - 1:05:04)
To be fair, though, I feel like if we're being bluntly honest, most of the world doesn't really follow the European definitions of anything anymore. And 99% of stablecoin growth is Asia and the US nowadays. So it's kind of like everyone kind of laughs at Europe on this and kind of says, go back to rewriting your 500 different laws about stablecoins that are inconsistent with one another.


For better or worse, this is true.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:04 - 1:05:18)
GDPR is such a road to hell paved with good intention. Like it's such a good idea, we should protect the privacy of the users. And what it ended up being is just like a mess. And it doesn't really protect --


[Sid Gandhi] (1:05:18 - 1:05:21)
I think GDPR was great. They should have just dropped cookie banners.


[Anna Rose] (1:05:23 - 1:05:25)
Then we wouldn't be as annoyed by it. Yeah.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:05:25 - 1:06:06)
If they just dropped cookie banners, I don't think any consumer would bat an eye about anything GDPR related. But like to your point, they're in like, yes, I agree with that.


But given that these payment systems built on top of stablecoins are global and they do interact with European consumers, and coupled that with other countries have started putting in similar laws. I know for a fact that India just recently in the last 6 months put in a similar data privacy protection law. You're going to start seeing that in more and more sophisticated countries in Asia and stuff like that.


So maybe GDPR is a bit laughable right now, but it's still law. You still have to follow it and it's illegal if you don't.


[Anna Rose] (1:06:06 - 1:07:00)
So we're at time and we're going to wrap up the show. I actually had a few other topics I wanted to talk about with you folks, like doing privacy in 2023 when it was very unpopular. Why did you do it? Or the sort of zkID, something we've talked about a lot on the show, I feel like starts to overlap a little bit with what you're talking about, where the KYC lives somewhere else, and you have these attestations, basically ZKPs, proving that you're allowed to be in a space.


Yeah. It's just there's a bunch of topics that I feel like Payy kind of touches on we didn't get to, but hopefully we get to do it in some future episode or session or something like that.


But I want to say a big thank you for coming on the show, sharing with us the story of Payy, the focus on private payments, how you've built it, kind of the complications and some of this other conversation about the general space. 


Yeah. Thanks so much.


[Calum Moore] (1:07:00 - 1:07:04)
Yeah. Thanks.


[Sid Gandhi] (1:07:00 - 1:07:04)
Yeah. Thank you for having us. It was a great conversation, honestly.


[Tarun Chitra] (1:07:04 - 1:07:25)
Thanks for coming on. You know, I think somehow people always think payments is the easiest and most boring application of blockchains, but yet it's still the one that every few years someone is like, why can't we fix payments?


It's always good to kind of see something tangible and also in a fun colour that I can get behind.


[Anna Rose] (1:07:26 - 1:07:34)
Nice. All right. I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Rachel, Henrik, Tanya and Hector.


And to our listeners, thanks for listening.