[Anna Rose] (0:05 - 2:06)
Welcome to Zero Knowledge. I'm your host, Anna Rose. In this podcast, we will be exploring the latest in zero knowledge research and the decentralised web, as well as new paradigms that promise to change the way we interact and transact online.


This week, I chat with Auryn Macmillan, founder of Gnosis Guild. We check in on Zodiac, which back in 2022 was billing itself as a DAO toolset, and today is a modular access control suite for on-chain entities. We also dig into the state of DAOs today, what's worked, what hasn't, and how some of the large-scale multisig hacks may have been prevented with tools like Zodiac.


We then shift to speaking about the Interfold, Gnosis Guild's new project combining FHE, ZK, and MPC to create encrypted execution environments. These enable multiple parties to collectively compute over private data and produce a verifiable output without any single trusted coordinator. We explore the use cases, like secret ballot voting and sealed bid auction, the broader potential for collaborative analytics and private AI training, and how this fits into the larger privacy ecosystem.


Now quick note before we kick off, we just hosted our ZK Summit 14 event on May 7th in Rome. It was so wonderful to catch up with all of you who came out. It reminded me why events like this are so important in an online community like ours, to really see each other face-to-face.


If you want to see the videos from our event, they're over on our YouTube channel. Be sure to subscribe while you're over there. Now here's my interview with Auryn Macmillan, where we talk about an update on DAOs and the Interfold.


Today I'm here with Auryn Macmillan, the founder of Gnosis Guild, which is an incubator that has produced Zodiac and more recently, the Interfold, which was previously Enclave. So welcome back to the show, Auryn.


[Auryn Macmillan] (2:07 - 2:08)
Hey, Anna.


It's good to be here.


[Anna Rose] (2:08 - 3:19)
The proposal to have you back on actually came through an old friend of mine, Ola. So I want to shout out Ola. Thanks for putting us back together.


So I was interested in having you back on kind of for multiple reasons. One, I wanted to check in on what was happening generally in Gnosis, specifically with the Gnosis Guild. What happened with Zodiac since we last spoke to you back in 2022.


We'll add a link to that episode if people want to hear sort of the background there. But actually this pitch came about because of the new project that you're working on called the Interfold, which is very much in our wheelhouse with like ZK, MPC, FHE, like all the things we love on the show. I want to understand how these things are working together.


And also I want to understand why are you working on that? Because it seems like a bit of a detour. So yeah, there's a lot to dive into here.


Why don't we start with the larger picture of Gnosis? I know that Gnosis Guild was like a spin out. When you were on back in 2022, I think you were in the process of spinning out of Gnosis.


What's the relationship like today? And actually, yeah, did you spin out? When did you spin out?


How did you spin out?


[Auryn Macmillan] (3:19 - 3:53)
Yeah, no, it's a long and colourful history. So yeah, I think when we spoke last time, we were in the early stages of planning to spin out. And then it was still maybe another year, year and a half till we actually executed on it.


So we spun out in 2023 and have been operating independently since then, effectively as a kind of venture studio incubator type thing. We have a handful of internal projects that we've built up. The two most visible and the ones that we're kind of putting most energy into at the moment are Zodiac and the Interfold.


Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (3:53 - 4:19)
Cool. And in that episode, we really dug into Zodiac. I guess it was at the time sort of the vision for it.


You were taking things that had been built, I think, for bespoke Gnosis products like Safe and all of these other products that were coming out of the Gnosis team's work. And you were kind of putting this under a new umbrella called the Zodiac DAO tools, basically. Maybe we should explore and remind people what that was or what that is.


[Auryn Macmillan] (4:20 - 5:34)
Well, so yeah, originally Gnosis was a team we spun up to essentially design and implement the technical side of the Gnosis DAO. And in doing that, I guess, arrived at what we thought were a handful of best practices on how to build on-chain entities, how to set up the on-chain account structure for on-chain entities. And essentially, that was using a safe and then plugging modular components into the safe to change how it behaves, a system of access control layers on top of the safe, so that you could have a very nuanced expression of an organisational structure.


And so yeah, in doing that for the Gnosis DAO, we ultimately ended up standardising this suite of tooling and that became Zodiac. And then I think how it evolved from then is beyond just this original, I guess, like tightly focused DAO use case to more broadly any on-chain entity. And so it's being used now still in a lot of DAO settings and treasury management settings and vault management settings, all the way down to consumer-facing settings like the Gnosis Pay credit card, debit card, right?


This uses Zodiac under the hood as part of its account structure. Interesting.


[Anna Rose] (5:34 - 5:48)
So what is it really like? It started as DAO tooling, but is it like, is it smart contract, smart account infrastructure? Like what would you, what would be a similar product that maybe we talked about in the past to what it's become?


[Auryn Macmillan] (5:48 - 7:17)
I mean, I would say it's essentially an access control suite. So it's very fine grained, nuanced access control for on-chain entities. The kind of typical access control in Ethereum smart contracts is very, very naive, right?


You either, you're the owner of this contract and you've got God mode. You can do whatever you want, or you have a balance in this contract and you can touch your balance and that's all. And it's like, there's a huge gap in between this.


And especially when you start thinking about the kind of complex organisational structures, you would typically want much, much more nuance in how you interact with and kind of what permissions are given to which different parties and all this kind of stuff. And so this is essentially what Zodiac is good at doing, is allowing for much more nuanced access control on top of these systems that have out of the box, very naive access controls. I mean, in terms of things that would compare it to, I think the closest comparisons are things like maybe Fireblocks and other services where you have these permissions or policy engine type things.


But these are all at the key pair level, at the private key level, right? They modulate how you interact with the key itself rather than having the permissions live at the smart contract level. And so they're not quite that competitive because they can be used in tandem, right?


You could have these kind of access control layers happen at both the key level and at the smart contract level, but in terms of functionality, that's I think the closest parallel.


[Anna Rose] (7:18 - 7:46)
It's sort of, I mean, there's a memory of having many years ago, I feel like I date myself here with, you know, having people on to talk about Yearn and the Yearn Vaults back in, I think this is DeFi summer, this is possibly 2020 or something like that. At the time they had all these like very bespoke access control for all these different decisions. Do you feel like Zodiac comes along and kind of takes that over, like makes it so that you don't have to build that all yourself?


[Auryn Macmillan] (7:47 - 8:23)
Yeah. Well, so this was part of the rationale for the design decisions around Zodiac was recognising that there were several other systems that had attempted to do this kind of thing. You can put more nuanced access control on-chain, but the approach that they took to do it was building a bespoke adapter for every new thing that they wanted to touch, every new DeFi system they wanted to interact with.


And that meant additional smart contracts needing to be built, which means additional auditing and ultimately like a really long drawn out timeline to actually getting an interaction live within your protocol.


[Anna Rose] (8:24 - 8:27)
And a tonne of new vulnerabilities introduced potentially along the way.


[Auryn Macmillan] (8:27 - 8:40)
Yeah, exactly. And so the design decision here was to have one smart contract that effectively gives you a DSL for interacting with, for defining these permission structures.


[Anna Rose] (8:41 - 9:00)
So back then, I think you mentioned that you had like about $600 million worth of tokens work with being interacted with within Zodiac. I don't actually know what that meant. They were being held by Zodiac, but yeah, what was that number and what would it be today?


[Auryn Macmillan] (9:00 - 9:24)
I assume we probably were talking about the total assets that were secured by Zodiac, essentially like sitting in safes or systems controlled by safes that were then controlled by or had kind of permission structure set up by Zodiac. That number today would be more like $3 billion and something like $10 billion transacted. Yeah, so it's grown pretty significantly since then.


[Anna Rose] (9:25 - 9:30)
What is the majority of that transaction volume and that volume generally?


[Auryn Macmillan] (9:30 - 9:52)
Yeah, I'd say the majority of it is treasury managers doing kind of non-custodial treasury management and vault managers doing kind of the same type of thing. In terms of transaction volume, it would be things like the notice pay cards. They'd be doing the bulk of transactions in terms of numbers, but in terms of transaction value, that would be those treasury managers.


[Anna Rose] (9:52 - 9:58)
Got it. I was actually going to ask you if notice pay was also running through that, and it sounds like it is.


[Auryn Macmillan] (9:58 - 9:58)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (9:59 - 10:37)
I want to soon move on to the second project that we're here to talk about, which is the Interfold. But before I do that, I did want to ask something about sort of the state of DAOs generally. Because there was this large exploit of Bybit, which I know had something to do with a safe, and I'm assuming had something to do maybe with Zodiac too.


So there's two questions here. One is sort of where DAO's at, and the other is, let's talk about the security of DAOs. So actually, let's start with the second question.


Security of DAOs, security in general. Was Zodiac's architecture somewhat touched by that hack? Was it the Zodiac tech itself that was hacked?


[Auryn Macmillan] (10:38 - 12:33)
No. So Zodiac was not involved, unfortunately. I think if it was, we would have kind of radically limited the blast radius there.


So, yeah, in Bybit's case, they were just using a kind of typical safe deployment. If I recall correctly, it was something like three out of five signers, or maybe even lower, maybe two out of three, regardless. It was a relatively small signer set.


And the exploit was, if I recall correctly, a container that was serving the front end for safe, was compromised, and had injected some code that was specifically targeting Bybit. So only when they tried to broadcast a transaction did it essentially replace the payload with a malicious payload. And the reason that I say that Zodiac could have kind of minimised the blast radius is the transaction that they were executing was a relatively routine transaction, so clearing funds from one account to another account, and they were doing this every day or every couple of days on a pretty routine basis, to know well in advance where it's coming from and where it's going.


And so one of the things that you can do with Zodiac is set up roles such that you can define, OK, this account is allowed to trigger a transaction from the safe over to this other account, and you can move up to X amount of money, or you can enforce whatever arbitrary conditions you want on that. And I think the really key learning from that, though, is that for these kind of routine transactions, there's no need to unlock root access to the safe. There's no need to have the safe unlocked such that it can execute anything, right?


You can define up front what is the set of acceptable transactions, and then only unlock that on a routine basis so that you minimise the opportunity for something catastrophic like this. And if that key is exploited, the worst it can do is move your funds from one account you control to the other account you control.


[Anna Rose] (12:33 - 12:55)
So in this case, though, I guess they weren't using the Zodiac tools, but they were using a safe. So how and who would have added the Zodiac? I actually don't know how they would work in tandem.


Like, would it be deploying a different kind of safe? Would it be deploying a safe through your tool set? Like, yeah, I thought I always thought it was sort of the same underlying tech.


[Auryn Macmillan] (12:55 - 14:30)
Yeah. So it's the same base contract, the safe. And you can use Zodiac on top of any existing safe.


And yeah, essentially what you'll do is there's a Zodiac app within the safe interface, or there is a dedicated Zodiac application separate to the safe interface. You navigate to that, deploy your, in this case, roles module, define the set of permissions, the permission structure you want for your safe. And then when you're executing a transaction now, there's a couple of different routes you can go through to trigger these, again, kind of routine daily actions that will ultimately execute through that role rather than through the multisig entry point.


And maybe to go a little bit deeper there, at the safe contract level, there are multiple entry points. One is the entry point that you go through when you execute a multisig transaction. So this one, you have to pass in this array of signatures from the various signers in order to have it execute a payload.


And if you have the threshold or more signers, then it will execute. The other is this exec transaction from module entry point. And this allows any module that has been enabled on the safe, essentially any address that's been enabled on the safe, to unilaterally execute whatever it wants.


And so you can define whatever logic you want in a contract, enable that contract as a module. And now that contract gets unilateral control over the safe. And so this is what Zodiac roles or Zodiac modules are, as the extra logic in a new contract that you enable on top of the safe.


So then you can have whatever other arbitrary access control structure you want.


[Anna Rose] (14:31 - 14:42)
Have there been other security things that did affect you? Any sort of hacks where you did see like your own tech stack be part of it? Or has it been really like a blocker to those hacks?


[Auryn Macmillan] (14:42 - 14:48)
Yeah, we we've not had anything, any major exploits or anything like this. Fingers crossed that we don't.


[Anna Rose] (14:48 - 14:51)
Knock on wood, I feel like it's tough to say that publicly.


[Auryn Macmillan] (14:52 - 15:31)
Yeah, no, no, we to date haven't. And I think part of it is because of the deliberate design philosophy and to really constrain what types of actions people can take, or entities can take, addresses can take. Yeah, we for a long while had a very aggressive bug bounty on it.


And so there was a huge incentive to report bugs through that rather than to go and exploit them. That bug bounty is no longer live, but we still do get reports here and there. And again, most of them have just been kind of informational level reports, as opposed to anything that is a significant vulnerability out in the wild.


[Anna Rose] (15:31 - 16:02)
What projects are using Zodiac? Like DAOs in general, since we spoke, became kind of the way that projects that had trouble in a way, like launching a token, they launch a DAO, even if it made sense or not. There's a lot of DAOs that in the DeFi world that have become hyper like publicised, not so much due to bugs, but more due to like takeovers and like all of these, you know, human politics side of things.


I'm curious, like which DAOs are using Zodiac? And two, what are your general thoughts on DAOs today?


[Auryn Macmillan] (16:02 - 16:39)
I mean, in terms of DAOs using Zodiac, we still have obviously the Narcissus DAO using it. And then a whole host of others using the snapshot integration that I think we spoke about last time around. Probably the more interesting set of users at this point, again, that are accounting for most of the transaction volume are the treasury managers.


And so this is things like KPK, Rethink Finance, Lagoon Finance, Arbitrum has a large chunk of their sub DAOs leveraging it. And then beyond that, again, things like Narcissus Pay that use it under the hood as part of their auth structure for their cards.


[Anna Rose] (16:40 - 16:45)
Do you ever get used in sort of these multi-sigs or committees that are on some of these L2s?


[Auryn Macmillan] (16:45 - 17:06)
Yes, but off the top of my head, I can't remember which. So there are a couple that have done this for essentially pause buttons. And so they want to give some committee permission to hit a pause button, but not kind of everything else on the system.


And so, yeah, this is this is one neat use case that's been used a handful of times, but it's probably underutilised.


[Anna Rose] (17:07 - 17:18)
OK, you're not it's not like because the Arbitrum committee all of a sudden this week, as our recording, there was a big hack where the Arbitrum committee became like a relevant party that everyone was looking at.


[Auryn Macmillan] (17:18 - 17:19)
Right.


[Anna Rose] (17:19 - 17:25)
They had to vote on sort of halting or rolling back even, I think, part of like a transaction.


[Auryn Macmillan] (17:25 - 17:33)
I don't think that Zodiac was involved in this. It's the kind of thing where it could be. I think in this case, it's not though.


[Anna Rose] (17:33 - 17:47)
OK. OK, now to my second part of my question, this general thoughts on DAOs today. How much has it changed?


Are they healthy? Are they unhealthy? Are they ascending?


Are they descending? Yeah. Where are they at?


[Auryn Macmillan] (17:47 - 18:14)
Yeah. I mean, I think the general sentiment around DAOs is pretty negative at the moment. A lot of folks have started to kind of write them off as a way of organising.


And I guess to a certain extent, rightly so, like there's been a lot of pretty catastrophic DAOs or DAOs that have just kind of petered out. That said, I don't know that the failure rate in DAOs is any worse than a traditional startup. And so I think it's there's probably this.


[Anna Rose] (18:14 - 18:19)
Like 9 out of 10 are failing, but we're seeing nine, like nine out of 10. So it looks like a lot.


[Auryn Macmillan] (18:19 - 18:19)
Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (18:20 - 18:24)
But there are like what are some examples of DAOs that are successful, though, still today?


[Auryn Macmillan] (18:25 - 22:18)
Yeah. I mean, I think Lido is a great example. Gnosis is still functioning.


I think Arbitrum is an interesting example as well. We've seen a lot of push into this. Doona and so like the Uniswap DAO is functioning and making some really interesting kind of legal progress.


So I think, yeah, there's still some really great examples of quite large scale DAOs operating and making legitimate technical business and kind of legal progress. But again, I think the challenge with DAOs in terms of failure rates is they probably fail as much as a typical startup, but they just do it much more publicly. You get thousands of people involved in something very early on and it fails, you know, at the same, roughly the same rate as a typical startup.


But a typical startup, when it fails, you know, that early on does not have the same kind of ecosystem around it. Exposure. Yeah.


I think another really interesting facet of the kind of evolution of DAOs is the way that their design patterns have evolved, right? The early DAOs very much followed this, I don't know, everyone votes on everything, right? You launch a token or something to give people vote weight and you have some forum or kind of way of creating proposals and everything is a referendum.


And it's hugely inefficient. You know, traditional firms have this kind of management hierarchical structure for the sake of organisational efficiency so that you don't have everyone weighing on every single kind of day-to-day operational decision and DAOs for the sake of capture resistance kind of, and decentralisation and kind of a lot of them elected to have, again, referendums on literally everything. And it made a lot of them very, very clunky.


And so over time, I think we've seen this trend towards DAOs creating some kind of hierarchical structure, whether that's sub-DAOs or outsourcing large chunks of the operational workload to foundations or to labs, organisations, or whatever it is. We've seen, yeah, this reintroduction of hierarchy for the sake of efficiency. There's two interesting trends that I think will modulate that further and perhaps even kind of have us head back more towards the everyone votes on everything, which I'm apprehensive about, but it is interesting.


So one of those is this trend and interest in futaki, right? Essentially governance by the market. And then the other is the proliferation of AI and AI agents, right?


And I think that the combination of these two things really, again, enables organisations that can have much more broadly distributed granular decision-making and for very different reasons, right? Futaki, you could imagine organisations that outsource any kind of impactful decision to a market on as granular a topic as makes sense for that organisation. And then on the agent side, you can imagine really having this ability to contract the timescales that those markets or those, whatever the decision-making mechanisms are, whether it's a market or a vote or whatever, really contracting the timescales that they operate on because people have the ability now to delegate their participation in it to an agent that can kind of better represent them.


They can represent them constantly. And so I think maybe the other trend that I glossed over there was around kind of delegation to, to doubt. So one of the other ways that people, that organisations dealt with this everyone votes on everything inefficiency was to have essentially delegative representation so that there would be, individuals would delegate their vote weight to someone else and they would vote on their behalf.


And I think by having AI agents. Be your representatives? Yeah, exactly.


Like you can kind of much more broadly than distribute voting power and much more, you kind of have this like AI proxy that acts for you in.


[Anna Rose] (22:19 - 22:24)
And like, yeah, votes based on sort of a list of requirements that you've maybe set out in advance.


[Auryn Macmillan] (22:25 - 22:27)
Right. Yeah. Kind of a corpus of your beliefs.


[Anna Rose] (22:27 - 23:22)
And maybe you'd get more votes, more active voting, more representative voting, because one of the issues is a lot of people don't have the time to actually do it. Right. I mean, my own personal experience is I, I've only ever been like a very active voter in the, in the Cosmos ecosystem because our validators ZKV was a big validator for a long time and we were voting on basically every vote that came through.


And so it was like an analysis. But in that case, it was like a company decision, but as a holder of a token, like I wouldn't have had probably the bandwidth to do that. And that meant that a lot of people who maybe did have interests but wouldn't have had bandwidth weren't really voting.


And they were, there was a delegation through the proof of stake mechanism. But this is, yeah, this is kind of, that's been my only experience, but I think it's a classic thing, right? It's like you want to have this democratic and everyone has a say and you can really gauge, you know, the real sentiment, but then people don't have time.


[Auryn Macmillan] (23:22 - 23:23)
Right. Yeah, you have this bandwidth.


[Anna Rose] (23:24 - 23:31)
And so they delegate. But that person, that one delegation may not represent all of their views. It's sort of like voting in a democracy, basically.


[Auryn Macmillan] (23:32 - 23:48)
Right. And so, yeah, I think we may end up seeing this shift back towards more direct democracy, but in a way that's AI augmented or where you have this kind of AI proxy that's voting on your behalf, but representing solely you rather than, you know, having a constituency.


[Anna Rose] (23:49 - 24:08)
Interesting. I want to move on to sort of the newer project, the Interfold, because, I mean, that was, in a way, what prompted this catch up and an interview. What are the steps from everything we've been talking about with Zodiac and DAO's to what was Enclave, which is now the Interfold?


[Auryn Macmillan] (24:09 - 24:09)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (24:09 - 24:12)
And by the way, is it the Interfold or is it Interfold?


[Auryn Macmillan] (24:12 - 24:19)
We are currently calling it the Interfold, trying to, which gets a little bit of a...


[Anna Rose] (24:19 - 24:20)
Very indie rock of you.


[Auryn Macmillan] (24:20 - 24:25)
Yeah, yeah. Trying to be like very deliberate. There is one.


There is the Interfold, right?


[Anna Rose] (24:25 - 24:26)
OK.


[Auryn Macmillan] (24:26 - 25:02)
And we'll see how that evolves. Obviously, how it evolves semantically, how people use it, we'll define it in the end. But this is what we're trying to instantiate it as.


OK. Yeah. I mean, the line of connection here, right?


So we started out, Notice Guild started out building DAO tooling. A large chunk of DAO tooling has to do with voting. I had been playing around in a side project for a long time, a side project called Clearfund that touched another piece of technology that actually you had Wade J.


Coe on a number of years ago. Yeah, Macy, so the Minimal Anti-Collusion Infrastructure. I've been playing around with that with Clearfund for a while.


Clearfund was quadratic funding built on top of Macy.


[Anna Rose] (25:02 - 25:04)
It was like private Gitcoin back in the day.


[Auryn Macmillan] (25:04 - 25:05)
Exactly. Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (25:05 - 25:16)
Sort of donations, ways for projects to raise donations, but you could do it privately. And it was sort of experimenting. I mean, it was, I think it was firmly in the ZK space, right?


It was the ZKP under the hood.


[Auryn Macmillan] (25:16 - 25:40)
Absolutely. Yeah, yeah, yeah. Macy was essentially voting, secret ballot voting using zero-knowledge proofs.


And the fundamental limitation with Macy is that it has one trusted actor, right? There was this coordinator who, if they wanted, could look at all of the private state, right? One of the limitations with ZK is that you must know the thing that you're trying to prove something about.


[Anna Rose] (25:40 - 25:55)
Someone knows it. Hopefully the person who owns the info knows it and then makes the ZKP. But if you ever have to use a centralised server to prove your ZKP, then you are actually sending your secret to them.


And then they're going to create the proof. Exactly. Yeah.


[Auryn Macmillan] (25:55 - 26:18)
Well, and so like one of the limitations here, if you're building a system where your interactions are purely around your data, right? So I want to send a token from my address to your address. I only have to prove that I have the balance that I want to send to you.


Yeah. If we want to do something where we're aggregating information between the two of us, then ZK alone does not solve the problem unless we're willing to share the information with one another.


[Anna Rose] (26:18 - 26:18)
Yeah.


[Auryn Macmillan] (26:18 - 26:27)
And so this is where Macy's workaround for this was to have one trusted actor, the coordinator, who would collect everyone's votes and then...


[Anna Rose] (26:27 - 26:28)
Promise not to tell.


[Auryn Macmillan] (26:29 - 26:50)
Exactly. Promise not to look, run the ZKP, produce the tally and along with the proof for it. And then, yeah, you've got this verifiable tally with privacy guarantees that are rooted in the honesty of this coordinator.


I felt this very personally because I was the coordinator for several clear fun rounds.


[Anna Rose] (26:50 - 26:52)
And you're like, this is not right.


[Auryn Macmillan] (26:52 - 26:55)
Yeah, I trust me. I know that I'm not looking, but why should anyone else trust me?


[Anna Rose] (26:56 - 26:56)
Wow.


[Auryn Macmillan] (26:56 - 28:23)
And so essentially the interfold came about from thinking about this problem space. Like how do we distribute trust in that coordinator? How do we improve on that trust assumption?


And we realised this with ZK alone, it was not really possible because someone has to know all of the votes in order to generate the proofs of the tally. And so we came up with this architecture that was essentially a mashup of fully homomorphic encryption, zero knowledge proofs and MPC in order to... So ZKP is obviously to still give us the end-to-end verifiability and to allow things like input validation without having to input validation client side.


Fully homomorphic encryption to allow us to compute over data while it's in its encrypted state. And then MPC in order to distribute trust over the decryption keys. And FHE and MPC, there'll be some MPC maxes that will say...


FHE is MPC, yeah. Yeah, essentially. I mean, it's a reasonable argument, but there's a good reason to kind of distinguish the two for the sake of really getting into the weeds around which components give you which sets of guarantees or which affordances.


If the system is purely MPC, then every node that's contributing a secret to it needs to be online and participate in the entire programme. Whereas when you add FHE into this mix, you can limit the MPC component to key generation and decryption.


[Anna Rose] (28:23 - 28:28)
Just those two actions, but the in-between, they don't have to be online for it to happen.


[Auryn Macmillan] (28:28 - 28:29)
Exactly, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (28:29 - 28:30)
Okay.


[Auryn Macmillan] (28:30 - 29:17)
Say we're talking about a voting application. If you're running a voting application in purely MPC, then the actual tally, every MPC node needs to run that computation, right? Needs to run their share of the computation that's tallying the vote.


Whereas if you're doing this kind of mashup of MPC and FHE, the MPC nodes create their key and then do decryption on the other end, but the vote tally happened in between, and there's no work for the nodes at all in that tallying phase. Obviously, a vote is probably a bad example here, because it's a really simple computation that would scale easily for the MPC nodes. But if you start getting into more complex jobs, then having every MPC node have to run that entire job runs into scalability issues really quickly.


[Anna Rose] (29:18 - 29:30)
But what kind of examples of those more complicated actions are there? Because you're saying sort of this came out of DAOs and voting. So voting was, it sounds like, and Macy to me is sort of a voting project.


[Auryn Macmillan] (29:30 - 31:41)
Yeah, yeah. So voting was the wedge into this as a problem space. And I think the real light bulb for us, and kind of what convinced us to push ahead and actually build it, was realising that voting was just one of a whole class of these applications, right?


That benefit from being able to have many private inputs from many different parties, arbitrarily compute over them and produce a verifiable output. So other examples, we were essentially targeting two as beachhead use cases in voting and auctions. So sealed bid auctions and secret ballot voting are these two kind of beachhead use cases.


They both fall into this category of problems where your integrity guarantees or legitimacy guarantees for the programme are partially based in their capacity to maintain secret state, right? For the votes or for the bids to be legitimately receipt free or private indefinitely. In the case of voting, it's a collusion, coercion resistance mechanism.


And in the case of auctions, it's especially over kind of repeated games, it's an economic efficiency gain to be able to essentially keep your strategy secret and have the auction still kind of produce an output and not have to rely on, again, a trusted auctioneer or something like this to maintain the secret state. So that's the first category. The second category of use cases, essentially around things where you get information access or the liability from having to touch essentially plain text data.


So you can think about this as things like collaborative research or collaborative analytics. Concrete example might be, say, you want to train a model on data that's warehoused by a handful of different medical research or medical facilities, right? They would have really strict data privacy controls internally, as well as things like HIPAA regulations that would mediate their abilities to share data with one another.


They also might be competitive institutions that are interacting with one another and so may not want to share information directly, but could collectively gain some benefit by being able to collectively produce some output, you know, train someone or run some data analytics, some linear regression or whatever it is over there.


[Anna Rose] (31:41 - 32:09)
This is the classic ZKP use case I remember like eight, nine years ago talking about, I think even before I started this show, when I just learned what ZKPs were, that, you know, hospitals sharing data and running something over the data. But we just had zero knowledge proofs as the only tool in the tool set. In the end, you ran into a lot of issues here more because of just the way these organisations are.


Do you have an idea of where that could actually happen in real life?


[Auryn Macmillan] (32:09 - 32:35)
Yeah, I mean, I think that the hospital example is a really classic one there, and I do still think it's viable. Again, the challenge with it being purely ZK is that you can prove things about your data, but you can't necessarily collectively compute something over your data, kind of compute a function that takes inputs from all of your data and kind of keeps those inputs private from one another. And so this is where this combination of technologies really enable something new.


[Anna Rose] (32:35 - 32:59)
It actually fulfils the pitch that we made all those years ago, which actually would have had also technical problems. Although I still think the real problem or the real challenge there is just getting adoption by big institutions of anything new. It's more of a human problem than a technical problem.


But it does sound like this at least could do it in a more complete way than what we had had in our minds earlier.


[Auryn Macmillan] (32:59 - 33:55)
Fully agree there. There's this huge gulf between technically possible and kind of... Realistically feasible in the world.


Well, even that, I think feasible in terms of like, we can run the computation. That's doable. Can we get compliance sign off from a handful of different institutions competing with each other?


You know, those kind of things. Yeah, I think there'll necessarily be a long pipeline to making that kind of thing happen. But the starting point, proving that it actually works in kind of adversarial, hostile environments like the Web3 space, that it works, that it maintains privacy, that people are trying to attack it.


And it's surviving. Yeah, exactly. And so I think we luckily have the kind of perfect proving ground for it.


And I think we'll be able to get it to a point where we can legitimately convince these larger scale use cases to play with that and ultimately adopt it.


[Anna Rose] (33:55 - 34:47)
It's funny because in your telling of this project, I mean, I do hear so many echoes of early Gnosis projects as well, like the auctions. I mean, it's coming out of the original Gnosis company that at the time was working on SAFEs, then it's DAOs, then it's voting, then it's auctions. And auctions was something that had definitely been covered earlier in the Gnosis world.


Gnosis, to me, has been like this project, I mean, you could call it an incubator, but it's almost like they sped run a lot of these experiments and not always at the right time. I feel like a lot of things came out that eventually became super relevant, but maybe not when Gnosis did it, except for things like the SAFE, which was really like a major hit, I would say. And I think maybe Gnosis Pay definitely like hit people's radar as well.


Right, right. Calswap, I think, is another example where it's...


[Auryn Macmillan] (34:47 - 34:48)
Oh, Calswap, for sure, a hundred percent.


[Anna Rose] (34:49 - 34:54)
I did want to ask, though, because Gnosis originally, originally, originally had been a prediction market.


[Auryn Macmillan] (34:54 - 34:55)
Right.


[Anna Rose] (34:55 - 35:33)
I think a lot of people don't know that. Like, long before Polymarket or Calshi were like twinkles in their founders' eyes, I think. I think, I actually don't know for sure when they started, but I get the sense that they're much later stage.


Gnosis was like a, they were pitching a prediction market back in 2016. Right. And it was too early.


It was like, it wasn't ready. Like the tooling wasn't there, the battle-testedness wasn't there, the marketing wasn't there, the buy-in from the world was not there yet. But I do wonder when you talk about these encryption environments, like in the Interfold, has prediction markets, that kind of thing, has that ever like hit your radar?


Is that something you might want to explore again?


[Auryn Macmillan] (35:33 - 35:51)
Yeah, there's definitely some interesting overlap there in prediction market design. People talk a lot about this desire for private prediction markets in various different contexts. And so, yeah, this is something that we're thinking about as well, is how do we support this?


Private prediction markets could be terrifying.


[Anna Rose] (35:52 - 36:28)
Dude, that's when the kill list, you like put awful, awful, terrible worst case scenario use case of a prediction market, which is sort of happening already, which is like a terrible event. Maybe somebody dying and then people betting on it, but then someone actually following through in order to earn the money that they've bet on. Like it's sort of incentivising in really scary ways.


Just recently, you know, there was an event put forth and then an outcome predicted on where it had to do with like military action. And it was, I think they just discovered this was done by one of the soldiers who knew that the action was going to happen.


[Auryn Macmillan] (36:29 - 36:32)
Yeah, yeah. This was really interesting. It's just going off over the last couple of days.


[Anna Rose] (36:32 - 36:35)
And now imagine adding privacy. Yikes. But I guess it's there.


[Auryn Macmillan] (36:36 - 38:07)
Yeah, privacy is kind of a double-edged sword. And this is where I say private prediction markets means something different. It's a very fuzzy term right now because it could be instantiated in a bunch of different ways.


And I think the way that is very interesting is that prediction markets in general have this sponsorship problem, right? Like there's many, many people that would benefit from the knowledge that a prediction market might produce or kind of incentivise someone to leak. But in order to bootstrap enough liquidity, someone has to essentially put liquidity up for others to come and capture in order to have the incentive there for someone to leak information.


And so in a kind of competitive environment, someone providing the subsidy probably does not want to share the information created from it with the rest of the market. And so there's this funny tension there. And I think the interesting version of private prediction market is less about privacy for bidders, for buyers, and more about having private information on the current state of the prediction market, right?


Like being able to have an individual kind of purchase the rights to have exclusivity on that. Oh, interesting. I mean, in either case, it's interesting.


And yeah, just to go back to this military action, there was this black ops soldier who had information on the, I think, mission going to Venezuela and bought a series of positions leading up to it and ultimately made a pretty handsome profit out of it.


[Anna Rose] (38:08 - 38:14)
But got caught quite easily, probably, because I don't think this person really realised how trackable that all is. Right.


[Auryn Macmillan] (38:14 - 39:08)
Yeah. And then that other side of private prediction markets doesn't exist, right? With kind of buyer side privacy, or at least you've got to go and jump through a bunch of additional hoops if you want to give yourself some greater measure of privacy there.


Yeah. The other thing I wanted to touch on there is that you talked about Gnosis initially being a prediction markets project. And yeah, this is what the original vision for Gnosis was.


And it had several forays either directly or kind of indirectly into producing prediction markets. Site was a prediction market that Gnosis spun up that was fully regulated. And then Gnosis had an interesting relationship with the DXDAO that ultimately made Omen, which was this DAO-owned prediction market built.


Both of these were built on top of the conditional tokens framework that Gnosis had built. And then, funnily enough, you mentioned PolyMarket. PolyMarket is also built on top of the conditional tokens framework.


[Anna Rose] (39:08 - 39:10)
Oh, Gnosis is in the DNA.


[Auryn Macmillan] (39:11 - 39:20)
Right. Yeah. So it's using kind of under the hood some of the infrastructure that Gnosis produced back in the day and still kind of functioning on top of that now.


Interesting.


[Anna Rose] (39:21 - 39:42)
Going back to the Interfold and sort of to understand where that project is at. You just you described which parts use what kind of cryptography, but is this something that's live already is being used? Where would it be used?


Would it be used within the Zodiac tool set? Is it like a new module within that or is it something else?


[Auryn Macmillan] (39:42 - 40:15)
Yeah. So completely separate project. I imagine that at some point we'll probably build some Zodiac modules that leverage it.


But yeah, they're kind of very distinct projects with quite different goals and directions. The Interfold is coming up to a launch. We're hoping to get this thing live into production in mid-June.


So we're on the cusp of first kind of more public testnet, getting external node operators on board and then getting through the full audit pipeline. That's our next kind of month and a half, two months is very audit and testnet heavy.


[Anna Rose] (40:15 - 40:15)
OK.


[Auryn Macmillan] (40:16 - 40:47)
At a kind of high level, the Interfold is a, I guess, a co-processor, right? So you have an entry point on chain where you request a compute environment and that spins up a bunch of off-chain processes, the DKG process to give you an encryption key and then your way to publish inputs, run a compute job and then request decryption. It will be deployed to mainnet Ethereum and potentially some L2s as well.


But yeah, hoping to go live in June. And it's still still kind of early days for it.


[Anna Rose] (40:47 - 41:09)
Nice. As you're talking about the use cases being like an auction as a potential use case, what came up in my mind was the recent Aztec sale that happened last year where they did sort of a special built throwback to the ICO days. But, you know, with sophisticated tools.


Would that be something that could be done within the Interfold or is it very different?


[Auryn Macmillan] (41:10 - 41:20)
Yeah, absolutely. This is, yeah, this is the kind of thing that we're thinking about on the auction side. Aztec used Uniswap's CCA auction, this continuous clearing auction.


[Anna Rose] (41:21 - 41:28)
I think they did something extra to it, too, though. I thought there was like variation on it. Or was it just the first time it was used publicly?


[Auryn Macmillan] (41:28 - 41:29)
I think it was just the first time it was used.


[Anna Rose] (41:30 - 41:30)
OK, OK.


[Auryn Macmillan] (41:30 - 42:27)
Yeah, this this was a really interesting mechanism. Obviously, there was some, I think, growing pains as people understood how to use it, which is pretty typical for new auction mechanisms. Again, thinking back to Gnosis and its relationship to auctions, Gnosis ran a Dutch auction in 2017 for its token launch.


And I think folks didn't understand how a Dutch auction worked. And so there was some mayhem that happened around that as well. But yeah, so this continuous clearing auction, it's built on Uniswap V4, uses this kind of hooks architecture that Uniswap has.


And one of the things that we've been playing with is using that same kind of structure, again, using the CCA, but having the auction mechanics happen privately and then clear in batches without revealing the full price spread that individuals had put up as their bid. So, yeah, there's definitely capacity for it to hook into this type of thing and add a layer of privacy on top of these existing mechanisms.


[Anna Rose] (42:28 - 42:40)
Cool. You changed your name from Enclave to The Interfold. When I started doing research, I actually had Enclave, and that was what I was looking up.


And my immediate thought was, oh, it's a TEE related thing.


[Auryn Macmillan] (42:41 - 42:41)
Right.


[Anna Rose] (42:41 - 43:04)
But you aren't. You're actually the cryptographic sort of replication of what a TEE could be, a hardware-based Enclave. You, in your documentation, talk about something called encrypted execution environments.


So, yeah, I just wanted to talk a bit about the naming. You changed your name. Was the reason you changed the name, was it because people were mixing it up and thinking it's a TEE?


[Auryn Macmillan] (43:04 - 43:27)
Exactly, because of what you just said. Yeah. Yeah, so we got into this kind of repeated pattern where we'd get 10 or 15 minutes into a conversation, you know, go pretty deep into the architecture, why we decided to match these different things together.


And then we'd come out the other side and the person would say, OK, so you're a network of TEEs. And we'd be like, no, no. Actually, not at all.


[Anna Rose] (43:27 - 43:43)
So when you call, when you have the E3, this is this encrypted execution environment, that's instead of the trusted execution environment or trusted execution Enclave. Actually, what is the, what does TEE stand for? I feel like I mix this up sometimes.


[Auryn Macmillan] (43:43 - 43:44)
Trusted execution environment.


[Anna Rose] (43:45 - 43:45)
Environment, yeah.


[Auryn Macmillan] (43:45 - 44:42)
And the reason that, so Enclave gets thrown around synonymously with that. I think it's rooted in Apple's branding, Secure Enclaves, for their hardware security modules in their various devices. But yeah, it's become, Enclave has just become this synonymous word for TEEs, HSMs, all of these kind of hardware-based, yeah, exactly.


And so Enclave is a really hard name to let go of because it does fit really well. But yeah, we ultimately just kept running into the same issue. The other name that we had toyed with when we were playing with Enclave that actually is maybe a better, a better fit is Exclave.


So, and Exclave, so Enclave is like, in terms of like geography and politics, is like a region kind of fully housed within another region, like an autonomous region. And then Exclave is kind of the same thing, external to it. And so like, oh, maybe Exclave would work really well.


But then Secure Exclave does not abbreviate well.


[Anna Rose] (44:42 - 45:04)
But also, Exclave has a little bit of like, all your stuff is outside, which doesn't feel that safe. Like all of the stuff is outside of the centre instead of inside of something, which I think you are trying to, you know, visualise here. Things are happening within a private environment.


[Auryn Macmillan] (45:04 - 45:59)
Yeah. And so then, yeah, we kind of rebranded to The Interfold. And this was really, you know, there was a big exploration here around what other thing could properly communicate what the protocol is and the vibe that we wanted to have.


And we ultimately ended up kind of drawing from some fairly, I guess, sci-fi inspirations. They're thinking about things like pocket universes and fold space and all these kind of things, you know, fold space from Dune and pocket universes from Three-Body and the Remembrance of Earth's Past and all of these kind of things. And so, yeah, that was where the name kind of came from.


But then it also has this like, has this weird, part of the reason for adding the on the front of it is Interfold by itself had this funny, almost anti-mimetic property where it was just immediately forgettable. Like we did it repeatedly during the exploration. We're like, what was that other name?


And it would just, it happened over and over and over.


[Anna Rose] (46:00 - 46:05)
I have had to look back at my notes kind of every time I said it. And it'll say that. It's like, yeah, I hear you.


[Auryn Macmillan] (46:06 - 46:11)
OK. This is also kind of on theme, right? Like we have the encrypted execution environment.


[Anna Rose] (46:12 - 46:18)
There is no anti-mimetic division. Oh, my God. Amazing.


Always forget it.


[Auryn Macmillan] (46:18 - 46:18)
Exactly.


[Anna Rose] (46:19 - 46:20)
They'll never look there.


[Auryn Macmillan] (46:22 - 46:42)
And then like, yeah, the E3s, the encrypted execution environments are intended to be this ephemeral thing. Right. They spin up for a given job.


You do the DKG for it. The keys are used just for that job and then discarded afterwards. So like, yeah, even that like forgettability property of it is on theme.


And so, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (46:42 - 46:47)
Can I say this very dumb anecdote about that book, by the way, that I've never shared on the air?


[Auryn Macmillan] (46:47 - 46:49)
Absolutely. I love that book. It's awesome.


[Anna Rose] (46:49 - 46:55)
I bought, I had the original copy of that book that sat on my desk for a while without me picking it up.


[Auryn Macmillan] (46:55 - 46:55)
Yeah.


[Anna Rose] (46:55 - 47:53)
I picked it up. I got into it. I read about two thirds.


I was on a flight. Like, I managed to leave it somewhere on the flight and I left it with like another book. I went back.


They actually found the other book, but not that one. And I felt it was a perfect way. Oh, yeah.


And then it was a sold out. So I couldn't buy it again. Like, it's been sold out.


I think you could buy copies for like a thousand bucks. And there's a new version. They've like found a publisher and they're publishing it.


I signed up to get one. And that that has been cancelled. So I feel like I will never get to finish the book, which is such a perfect way to experience because it's just like it's like it's missing.


There's like the missing part that I'll never know. It's like been blocked out of my memory. And it's very on brand.


Yeah, I mean, stupid, stupid anecdote. But it's like I have some weird like, yeah, that book. Definitely.


I feel I have a story there.


[Auryn Macmillan] (47:53 - 47:57)
No, no, I love it. So I had the same copy, Quantum.


[Anna Rose] (47:58 - 47:59)
Yeah, like the little booklet.


[Auryn Macmillan] (48:00 - 48:08)
Yeah. And it was self-published. And then at some point they got a they got a publishing deal.


And so it could no longer self-publish. Had to had to stop selling that one.


[Anna Rose] (48:08 - 48:09)
Yes.


[Auryn Macmillan] (48:09 - 48:15)
And the gap between it being self-published and the new publisher releasing it has, you know, is indefinite at this point.


[Anna Rose] (48:16 - 48:18)
Oh, wait, has it not been released? Is that why? It's not just me.


[Auryn Macmillan] (48:19 - 48:24)
I don't think that the the new publish. Maybe it had. Actually, I haven't checked back in a couple of months.


But, yeah.


[Anna Rose] (48:25 - 48:26)
So it's like a perfect story.


[Auryn Macmillan] (48:26 - 48:32)
The last time I looked at it, people were selling copies of that self-published one for like 10 grand on eBay.


[Anna Rose] (48:32 - 48:51)
I know! When I looked it was a thousand. Is it more now?


And I lost that on a plane. Somebody found it. Somebody picked it up.


And I mean, it would have been such a weird book to find, especially if they had no reference to it. If they're like, what's this? And they just like read this really weird book that they discovered on a plane.


I mean, it's perfect.


[Auryn Macmillan] (48:51 - 48:52)
It's awesome.


[Anna Rose] (48:52 - 49:00)
To whoever found my book. If you're out there, give it back or sell it. I mean, it sounds like you can make a lot of money.


[Auryn Macmillan] (49:00 - 49:06)
So worth noting that the full text is also available online. Oh, is it? Yeah.


So you can go and finish the story.


[Anna Rose] (49:06 - 49:22)
But maybe I shouldn't, though. I feel like I just shouldn't. I feel like I can't now.


That's too good. Oh, my God. Well, on that note, kind of bringing it back to your work on the Interfold, how can people already get in touch?


How can they find out more? What should they already be doing?


[Auryn Macmillan] (49:22 - 50:23)
So the easiest thing is to jump on the website. It's theinterfold.com or into the NotionSkills Discord server. I guess we're also on Twitter X.


So just search for the Interfold on there. We are launching a more public facing testnet here shortly in the next couple of weeks. I'm not sure when this will go live.


So it may be by the time this goes live, we've already got the testnet up and running. But all of the developer documentation and DevNet that we've been hosting are already live. So if you're thinking about building applications on top of it, now's the right time to dive in and start looking at it.


Again, I guess to make it very succinct, the problem space is anything where you want to aggregate private information from many different parties and produce a verifiable output. So yeah, secret voting, sealed bid auctions, co-training, AI models, collaborative analytics, risk scoring, credit scoring, credit swaps. Yeah, there's this whole weird, interesting space of these type of problems.


[Anna Rose] (50:23 - 50:30)
What about like running benchmarks and like doing sort of research benchmarks? Could you ever do that in there? Maybe?


[Auryn Macmillan] (50:30 - 50:32)
I don't know enough about the problem.


[Anna Rose] (50:32 - 50:34)
Okay. Well, maybe something to explore.


[Auryn Macmillan] (50:35 - 50:49)
Yeah, if the problem involves aggregating benchmarks from a lot of different people in a way that they would want to keep their own individual benchmarks secret, then absolutely. This would be analogous to a kind of federated learning type problem.


[Anna Rose] (50:50 - 51:10)
Yeah. I mean, the example that actually is in my mind is recently the Google paper that had something about quantum. They used a ZKP to prove the algorithm worked, which is very complicated.


And I don't expect it to necessarily work in here, but almost like a simpler version of that, where you're trying to prove like a result somehow. I don't know.


[Auryn Macmillan] (51:10 - 51:32)
I think this gets at the like core distinction between problem spaces, right? So in that case, Google had produced a piece of information, right? They had a new algorithm.


Yeah, they had the entire thing and they wanted to prove to everyone else that they had this thing with these specific qualities without sharing the thing because there's a security concern about sharing the thing. So in that case, ZKP alone suffices.


[Anna Rose] (51:32 - 51:49)
Yes. But what if like all the ZKVM teams wanted to run benchmarks almost in this secret place where none of them were watching it as it was happening? I don't know if that would be a better example, where it is actually multiple parties trying to do comparative benchmarks.


[Auryn Macmillan] (51:49 - 52:05)
Yeah. I mean, this, again, if it's a scenario where they want to keep that information internal but produce a collective output, like you want to come up with, what is that? Average benchmark between all of us, but without sharing each individual's.


[Anna Rose] (52:05 - 52:06)
Yeah.


[Auryn Macmillan] (52:06 - 52:09)
Yeah. Then you could do that kind of thing in this environment.


[Anna Rose] (52:09 - 52:28)
I mean, that is not what they're doing. They're doing it fully in public. Right.


It's an open source stuff. But I just I was just trying to think of other examples where, yeah, there's like multiple people kind of trying to understand where they rank, but maybe are maybe have potentially like trade secrets about what's being benchmarked. I don't know.


[Auryn Macmillan] (52:28 - 52:51)
Yeah, I think this is the right type of problem space to explore. It's just figuring out where there's public private information boundary is. And it's really where there's the type of applications that make sense and where you have some private information that you want to aggregate in some way to produce that kind of collective output as opposed to aggregating already public information.


[Anna Rose] (52:51 - 53:06)
Yeah, yeah. Fair enough. Cool.


Well, thank you, Auryn, for coming on, sharing with us a little bit of the background history of Zodiac since we last spoke, what Gnosis Guild has been up to, kind of the spinning out of this new project, The Interfold. Yeah. Thank you so much.


[Auryn Macmillan] (53:07 - 53:08)
Absolutely. Thanks for having me.


[Anna Rose] (53:08 - 53:15)
I want to say thank you to the podcast team, Henrik, Rachel, Hector and Tanya, and to our listeners. Thanks for listening.
